---
layout: homily
title: "The Curing of the Man with an Unclean Spirit"
---


By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

"He went down to Capernaum, a town in Galilee, and taught them on the
Sabbath. And his teaching made a deep impression on them because his
word carried authority.

"In the synagogue, there was a man possessed by the spirit of an unclean
devil, and he shouted at the top of his voice, 'What do you want with
us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are:
the Holy One of God!' But Jesus rebuked it, saying, 'Be quiet! Come out
of him!' And the devil, throwing the man into the middle, went out of
him without hurting him at all.

"Astonishment seized them, and they were all saying to one another,
'What is it in his words? He gives orders to unclean spirits with
authority and power and they come out.' And the news of him traveled all
through the surrounding countryside" (Luke 4:31-37).

Our Lord teaches with authority. The evangelists repeatedly mention the
surprised reactions that Our Lord\'s teachings and His miracles provoke
in people, even in His own disciples. Sometimes they\'re even afraid to
ask Him questions (*cf*. Mark 9:32).

That reluctance is a sign of the reverential awe which seized and
captivated them, an awareness of His majesty reflected in His words and
in His deeds.

St. Luke tells us how after Jesus had cured a possessed man, "They were
all amazed and said to one another: 'What is this word? For with
authority and power, he commands the unclean spirits, and they come
out.'"

And on another occasion, St. Mark points out that people were astonished
at His teaching: "He taught them as one who had authority, not as the
scribes" (Mark 1:22).

The Second Person of the Blessed Trinity spoke through the medium of His
Holy Humanity, and the people, aware of His extraordinary power,
hastened to identify Him with the most exalted and famous figures of
their history: was he John the Baptist, or Elijah, or Jeremiah, or one
of the prophets? (*cf*. Matt. 16:14). They all fell very far short of
the truth.

The people who listened to Our Lord perceived very clearly the radical
difference that there was between the way the scribes and the Pharisees
taught and the certainty and vitality with which Christ pronounced His
doctrine.

Our Lord didn\'t express just a mere opinion. Neither does He show any
sign of uncertainty or of doubt.

We\'re told in St. Matthew that Jesus had now finished what He wanted to
say and His teaching made a deep impression on the people "because he
taught them with authority, unlike their own scribes" (Matt. 7:28-29).

He doesn\'t speak, like the prophets, in God\'s name, because He\'s not
just another prophet. He speaks in his name: "But I say to you..."

He teaches people the divine mysteries and the nature of human
relationships, and He backs up His teaching with miracles.

He explains his doctrine simply and vigorously because He speaks of what
He has seen. "In all truth, I tell you," we\'re told in St. John, "we
speak only about what we know and witness only to what we have seen and
yet you people reject our evidence" (John 3:11).

Our Lord doesn\'t give long-winded explanations. One spiritual writer
says, "He demonstrates nothing. He doesn\'t try to justify himself. He
doesn\'t argue. He teaches. His authority imposes itself because the
wisdom that emanates from him is irresistible. When you come to value
this wisdom, when your heart is pure enough to appreciate it, you know
that there cannot be any other.

"You see that this is absolute; that before him everything is but dust;
you see that He is Life. Just as when the sun rises the stars disappear,
the same happens with all the wisdom and all the opinions of men. 'Lord,
to whom shall we go? You have the words of eternal life'" (Jean
Leclercq, *Thirty Meditations on the Christian Life*).

"Your words, Lord, are spirit and they are life" (John 6:63). Our Lord
continues to speak to each one of us, personally, in the intimacy of our
prayer, and also when we read the Gospel each day.

We have to try and listen to Him also in the thousand and one little
events of the day, including those which men might call events of
failure or sorrow. He\'s also there.

In *The Forge*, St. Josemaría says, "When you open the Holy Gospel,
think that what is written there---the words and deeds of Christ---is
something that you should not only know, but live. Everything, every
point that is told there, has been gathered, detail by detail, for you
to make it come alive in the individual circumstances of your life.

"God has called us Catholics to follow him closely. In that holy
Writing, you will find the Life of Jesus, but you should also find your
own life there. ... Take up the Gospel every day, then, and read it and
live it as a definite rule. This is what the saints have done"
(Josemaría Escrivá, *The Forge*, Point 754).

We\'re told in St. Luke and St. John that Our Lord\'s teaching had such
power and authority that some who listened exclaimed that never before
had anything like it been heard in Israel (*cf*. Luke 19:48; John 7:46).

The Venerable Bede tells us that the scribes also taught the people what
was written in Moses and the Prophets, but Jesus preached to the people
as God and Lord of Moses Himself (St. Bede, *Commentary on St. Mark's
Gospel*).

Christ\'s words were full of life; they penetrated to the bottom of
men\'s hearts.

And we all have that experience. We notice some words of the Gospel,
maybe, jump about the page; hit us in the face. Or one day, one
particular word or phrase means more to us. Or over time, with grace, we
rediscover the unfathomable riches that are there in the Scriptures.

When John the Baptist pointed out Jesus as He passed by, two of his
disciples followed Him and spent the day in His company. St. John, the
one who gives us the great dialogues of Jesus, is silent on this
occasion. He only tells us that they met Him "about the tenth hour"
(John 1:39), about four in the afternoon.

When, many years later, he wrote his Gospel, he wanted to leave us
forever the precise unforgettable moment of his first encounter with Our
Lord.

What did Our Lord say to them? We only know the result from the words of
Andrew, the other disciple who followed Jesus: "We have found the
Messiah" (John 1:41). That afternoon God entered into the deepest
recesses of their hearts.

We are told in the Book of Isaiah, "Yet just as from the heavens the
rain and snow come down and do not return there till they have watered
the earth, making it fertile and fruitful, giving seed to him who sows
and bread to him who eats, so shall my word be that goes forth from my
mouth. It shall not return to me void but shall do my will, achieving
the end for which I sent it" (Isa. 55:10-11).

When we in turn open our hearts to Our Lord, His words pierce and
transform us. This happened to the men who had been sent to arrest Him,
and they returned empty-handed.

We are told in St. John, "Some wanted to arrest him, but no one laid
hands on him. The guards went back to the chief priests and Pharisees
who said to them, 'Why haven\'t you brought him?' The guards replied,
'No one has ever spoken like this man!'" (John 7:44-46).

We can look again at those words that Our Lord has left us, that can
open new horizons for us. "If you remain faithful to my word," we\'re
told, "you will truly be my disciples. And you will know the truth, and
the truth will set you free" (John 8:31-32).

In the Word, it is God Himself who comes to us and transforms us. "The
word of God is living," says St. Paul, efficacious and "sharper than any
two-edged sword. It penetrates to the very division of the soul and
spirit, the joints and marrow, and able to discern reflections and
thoughts of the heart" (Heb. 4:12).

"The word will be for you," says St. Peter, "as a lamp that shines in a
dark place until the dawn comes and the morning star rises in your
hearts" (2 Pet. 1:19).

"Your word is a lamp for my steps, a light on my way," the Psalms say.
"Lord, give me life according to your word" (*cf.* Ps. 119:105, 125).

St. James says, "Be doers of the word and not hearers only, deceiving
yourselves" (James 1:22).

Our Lord doesn't show any sign of doubt or uncertainty. He\'s very clear
in all the things He wants to say---sometimes very direct.

In His words, we find an infinite wisdom. He can be understood by
philosophers and by the uneducated, by adolescents and by children, by
men and women, by everybody.

He speaks about the most sublime things in the simplest of language. His
doctrine has a depth unlike any other, and yet it is within reach of
everybody.

His preaching is full of familiar ideas and images, which give His
preaching an incomparable beauty and attractiveness.

The smallest details serve to express the most sublime features of a new
doctrine of mysterious and unfathomable depth. "They gathered up all the
pieces that were left over" after the multiplication of the loaves and
the fish (Matt. 14:20).

Our Lord\'s whole life was an uninterrupted teaching process. Pope St.
John Paul says, "His silences, his miracles, his gestures, his prayer,
his love for people, his special affection for the lowly and the poor,
his acceptance of the total sacrifice on the Cross for the redemption of
the world, and his resurrection, all are the actualization of his word
and the fulfillment of revelation. ...

"These considerations...all strengthen our fervor with regard to Christ,
the Teacher who reveals God to man and man to himself, the Teacher who
saves, sanctifies, and guides, who lives, who speaks,...who muses,
moves, redresses, judges, forgives, and goes with us day by day on the
path of history, the Teacher who comes and will come in glory" (John
Paul II, Apostolic Exhortation, *Catechesi tradendae,* Point 9, October
16, 1979).

In our daily reading of the Gospel outside of Mass, we meet this same
Christ who speaks to us, teaches us, and consoles us. In that short
minute or two of our reading, we get to know Him better and better, to
imitate His life, and to love Him.

If we ask the Holy Spirit, who is the principal author of Sacred
Scripture, to come to our assistance, we\'ll be helped to be one more
protagonist in the scenes that we read, or perhaps to draw some definite
conclusion for the day.

"Your prayer," says St. Augustine, "is like a conversation with God.
When you read, God speaks to you; when you pray, you speak to him" (St.
Augustine, *Commentary on the Psalms*).

God speaks to us in many different ways when we read the Gospel. He
offers us the example of His life so that we can imitate Him in ours.

He washed the feet of the apostles. He shows us how to behave towards
others, our brothers and sisters. He reminds us that we are children of
God and that nothing ought to take our peace away.

The first words that Our Lord speaks to the apostles after His
resurrection are words of peace: "Peace be to you" (John 20:19).

He invites us to forgive the little offenses that we may suffer. He gets
us to prepare well for Confession, where our Heavenly Father awaits to
give us an embrace.

He asks us to be merciful today with our neighbor\'s defects, just as He
Himself was, to a supreme degree. He leads us to sanctify our work,
doing it perfectly, because it\'s what He Himself spent so many years
doing in Nazareth.

Each day we can get some little idea, some thought, some resolution to
remember while we work.

It\'s a good idea to try and do those few minutes of Gospel reading
early in the day, so as to put into practice the little resolutions
which can help us so much to improve.

Some people read the Gospel standing up, as a reminder of the early
Christian custom which has been preserved at Mass, whereby we stand for
the Gospel in an attitude of prayerful vigilance.

It can do us a lot of good to use the Gospel frequently as the source of
topics for our prayer. Sometimes we can try to enter the scene as
someone joining a little group gathered around Our Lord, or stopping at
a doorway to hear His teaching, or standing at the shore of the lake.

Perhaps we manage to hear only a part of the parable or snatches of the
conversation, but it\'s enough for something to start stirring in the
depths of our soul.

On other occasions we may find ourselves saying something to Him, just
like those others who said or shouted to Him in their great need:

"Lord, that I may see" (Matt. 10:51), give light to my soul, set me on
fire.

Or, the words of the publican who didn\'t consider himself worthy to
stand before his God: "God, be merciful to me, a sinner" (Luke 18:13).

Or the words of St. Peter: "Lord, you know everything, you know that I
love you" (John 21:17).

All these words or phrases can take on new meaning for us, and we can
confide to Our Lord the sentiments of love and purification that fill
our heart.

At other times we can contemplate His Holy Humanity, and seeing Him,
perfect Man, we can be moved to love Him more, to want to be more
faithful to Him.

We can contemplate Him at work in Nazareth, helping St. Joseph, or later
on looking after His Mother, or tired out, perhaps, from many hours of
preaching or from the strain of a long journey.

Every day, as we read the Gospel, Jesus passes beside us. Let us never
fail to see and to hear Him, like those disciples who met Him on the
road to Emmaus.

In the *Furrow*, St. Josemaría says, "'Stay with us, it is towards
evening. ...' The prayer of Cleophas and his companion was effective.
