---
layout: homily
title: "Salt That Has Lost Its Savor"
---


By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

"Salt without savor is no longer good for anything, except to be thrown
out and trodden underfoot by men" (Matt. 5:13).

Our Lord has told His disciples that they are "the salt of the earth"
(Matt. 5:13). They do to the world exactly what salt does to food,
keeping it from going bad and making it agreeable to the palate.

But salt can sometimes lose its savor or in itself deteriorate, and then
it becomes useless. This kind of change is, after sin, the saddest thing
that can befall a Christian, the point of whose existence has been to
give light to many, whereas now, in fact, they have become darkness.

Far from being able to point out the people he comes in touch with in
the right direction, that person now becomes disoriented and aimless
himself. Having been placed on earth to give strength to others, he has
nothing left to communicate now but weakness.

Lukewarmness is a disease of the soul that affects both the intellect
and the will, and leaves the Christian devoid of the strength to carry
out apostolate, at the same time filling him with a deep feeling of
sadness and impoverishment.

The sickness starts with a weakening of the will, brought about by means
of repeated faults and culpable omissions, of frequently doing wrong,
and possibly even worse, failing to do what is right.

The Christian no longer sees Christ clearly on the horizon of his life,
because he\'s been consistently careless regarding the little details
that are a proof of love.

He now discovers that Christ now seems far removed from him. His
interior life undergoes a profound change; it no longer has Our Lord as
its focal point.

The person who is lukewarm finds that their practices of piety have
become empty of content; he no longer puts his heart and soul into them.
He goes through the motions, performing them out of routine or habit, no
longer out of love.

One spiritual writer says: In this state, a man loses all spontaneity
and joy---recognizable characteristics of a soul in love---in responding
to anything that has a reference to God.

A lukewarm Christian is somehow 'inside out'; his is a soul that has
grown weary in its endeavor to improve. Christ has faded from the
horizon of his life.

The soul decries God, if he sees Him at all, describes Him as a remote
and distant figure, hazy and indistinct, with ill-defined features, and
probably indifferent to Him. No longer does he perform positive acts of
generosity as he formerly did. He is now prepared to settle for much
less (cf. Francis Fernández, *Lukewarmness*).

St. Thomas Aquinas cites as a feature of this state "a kind of sadness,
whereby a man becomes sluggish in spiritual exercises because they weary
the body" (Thomas Aquinas, *Summa Theologiae*, Part I, Question 63).

All norms of piety and devotion become a burden for us, a burden we find
increasingly hard to bear, instead of being a powerful center of energy,
driving us forward and helping us to overcome any difficulties we may
encounter.

There are many Christians who have sunk into lukewarmness. There is, in
our time, a great deal of savorless salt about.

We can consider in our prayer today whether we are going forward with
the firmness and confidence that Our Lord asks of us, whether we regard
our conversation with Him as the treasure which enables our interior
life to intensify and keep growing, and whether we properly nourish our
love.

We can consider whether, when we become aware of our weakness and our
lack of correspondence with grace, we promptly make acts of contrition
to close the breach the enemy has made, and is attempting to widen in
our defenses.

We mustn\'t confuse the state of the lukewarm soul with the sense of
dryness sometimes experienced when we perform our acts of piety, a
sensation produced on occasions or for long periods by tiredness, or
illness, or by the temporary loss of physiological keenness and
enthusiasm.

In such cases, in spite of the feeling of dryness, our will is firmly
set on all that is good. Our soul knows that it is traveling directly
towards Christ, even though it is at this moment passing over a stony
waste where the going is hard, and we can\'t find a single well or even
a spring of cool water.

But our soul knows where its destination lies and goes straight towards
it in spite of our weariness and thirst and the unfriendly terrain we
have to tread.

In the state of what\'s called aridity, even though the soul has no
feeling and it seems difficult to pray, to carry on any real
conversation with God, true devotion nevertheless remains.

St. Thomas Aquinas has defined this type of devotion as the "will to
give oneself readily to things concerning the \[service\] of God"
(Thomas Aquinas, *Summa Theologiae*, Part II-II, Question 82).

This "readiness" grows weak if the will falls into a state of
lukewarmness.

"I have this against you," says Our Lord in the Book of Revelation,
"that you have abandoned the love you had at first" (Rev. 2:4)---that
you have weakened, that you no longer love me as you did formerly.

A person who is determined to keep up their prayer, even in times of
aridity, when all feeling is absent, is perhaps like the person who
draws water from a well, bucket by bucket, one aspiration after another,
an act of sorrow. It\'s hard work and demands effort, but he does draw
out water.

On the other hand, in a state of lukewarmness, our imagination strays
and runs wild. We\'re no longer firmly determined to dispel voluntary
distractions and in practice, abandon prayer with the excuse that we\'re
getting no results from it.

Genuine conversation with God, on the other hand, even if God allows it
to be arid, is always fruitful, whatever the circumstances, as long as
we have rectitude of intention and are firmly intent on being close to
God.

We can remind ourselves, here and now, in the presence of God, that true
piety is not a matter of feelings, although sensitive affections are
good and they can be a great help in our prayer and in the whole of our
interior life, because they\'re an important part of human nature as it
was created by God.

But our feelings can be mistaken. You can feel very well, and you could
have a big cancer inside you. You might feel very sick, and you might be
as healthy as a horse. Feelings can be misleading. Christ\'s feelings on
the Cross cannot have been wonderful, with three big nails going through
Him.

And so, our affections should not occupy a disproportionately important
place in our life of piety. They\'re not the main part of our
relationship with God.

St. Josemaría used to say that the day you\'re doing your prayer and you
feel awful, you feel you\'re getting nothing, you feel it\'s a waste of
time---he said, "Persevere in that prayer, because that might be the
best prayer that you ever did, because that prayer is all done for God;
there are no human compensations.

If our prayer and our life of piety are full of compensations, it could
be that we\'re looking for the compensations, not necessarily seeking
Him.

Feelings help, but achieve no more than this assistance, because the
essence of piety does not consist in feelings, but in the will's being
determined to serve God, quite independently of any state of
mind---which is always so changeable---or of any other circumstances.

In matters of piety, we need to take care not to let ourselves be guided
by feelings, but rather by our intellect, enlightened and helped, as we
pray it will be, by faith.

One writer said, "To allow oneself to be guided by feelings would be
like handing over the management of one\'s house to a servant, while you
as its real owner abdicate responsibility for it. It\'s not the feelings
that are bad, but rather the degree of importance that we attribute to
them" (Joseph Tissot, *The Interior Life*).

Lukewarmness is sterile. Salt without savor "is no longer good for
anything except to be thrown out and trodden underfoot by men" (Matt.
5:13).

On the other hand, aridity can be the positive sign that God wants to
purify a particular soul.

In our apostolic life, there might be times when we\'re asked to do
things that don\'t give us pleasant feelings. We might be asked to give
a talk. We might be asked to go and find material means to set up some
apostolic work. We might be asked to research a certain topic for some
apostolic purpose. And we might find all of those things particularly
distasteful.

Our feelings might not be there, but if we approach those tasks with a
supernatural outlook and see that as the will of God for us, great
fruits may result.

We need to have interior life. As human beings, we can be a cause of
happiness or sadness, of light or darkness. We can be the source of
peace or of anxiety, either the leaven that enhances or a dead weight
that hinders the progress of others.

Our passage over this earth can never be a matter of indifference as far
as others are concerned. We help others to find Christ or we separate
them from Him. We enrich others or we impoverish them.

And we come across so many of these others---friends, workmates, members
of our family, neighbors---who seem to go after material goods as though
they hungered for them, material goods that only serve to lure them away
from the true good who is Jesus Christ.

They can journey through life like people who are lost. If the guide of
the blind is not to become blind himself (cf. Matt. 15:14), it\'s not
enough for him to know the way from hearsay, or from coming across mere
references to it.

If we are to help the people around us, it\'s not enough for us to have
a vague and superficial knowledge of the way. We need to walk along it
ourselves and to have first-hand knowledge of the obstacles that lie in
our path and which need to be surmounted.

We need to have interior life, to enter daily into personal conversation
with Jesus. We need to know His doctrine ever more deeply; to struggle
with still more determination to overcome our own defects. The
apostolate is the result of a great love for Christ.

The first Christians were the true *salt of the earth*, and they
preserved people and institutions---the whole of society---from
corruption.

What can it be that has happened in so many nations? Why is it that
Christians should now be giving the sad impression that they\'re unable
to slow down and halt the wave of corruption that\'s bursting in on the
family, on schools, and on institutions?

The faith is still the same. And Christ lives among us now just as He
did previously. His power is still infinite, divine.

One writer says, "Only the lukewarmness of so many thousands, indeed
millions, of Christians, explains how we can offer to the world a
spectacle of a Christianity that allows all kinds of heresies and
stupidities to be propounded within itself.

"Lukewarmness destroys the strength and endurance of the faith and is
the soulmate, in both a personal and a collective way, of compromise and
of a spirit of comfort-seeking" (Pedro Rodríguez, *Faith and Life of
Faith*).

It\'s difficult to explain many of the things that happen nowadays at a
personal and public level, if we don\'t bear in mind that so many people
who should be awake, watchful, and attentive have allowed their faith to
fall asleep.

Love has been snuffed out in so very many hearts. In many spheres, the
'normal Christian' now generally appears as someone who is lukewarm and
mediocre.

Among the first Christians, the 'normal Christian' meant someone who
lived the heroism of each day and, when the occasion presented itself,
accepted martyrdom itself. It could and did mean very often the
surrender of one\'s very life in defense of the faith.

When love grows cold and faith falls asleep, the salt loses its savor
and is no longer good for anything. It\'s just something to throw away.
What a pity if a Christian were to become as useless as this.

Lukewarmness is often the cause of apostolic ineffectiveness, because if
we are in its grip, the little we do becomes a task devoid of human or
supernatural attractiveness, and bereft of a spirit of sacrifice.

Faith that appears moribund and radiates little love and is unable to
win anyone over or find the right words with which to attract others to
a deep and intimate relationship with Christ.

We can ask Our Lord for the strength to react. We will be the *salt of
the earth* if we keep up our daily conversation with God, if we go with
ever greater faith and love to receive the Blessed Eucharist.

Love was, and is, the moving force of the life of the saints. It\'s the
whole reason for being of every life dedicated to God.

Love gives us wings with which to soar over any personal barriers to our
advancement, or any obstacles presented to us by our surroundings. Love
makes us unyielding when confronted by setbacks.

Lukewarmness, on the other hand, gives up at the slightest
difficulty---a letter we need to write, a phone call we should make, a
visit or a conversation that we need to have, or the lack of some
material means. It makes mountains out of molehills.

On the other hand, love for God makes a molehill out of a mountain. It
transforms the soul, gives it new lights, and opens up new horizons for
it. It makes the soul capable of achieving its highest desires and gives
it capacities it had never as much as dreamed of possessing.

Love doesn\'t make a fuss about the effort involved and fills the soul
with happiness as it surveys the results of its efforts.

In the parable of the prodigal son, we\'re also told about the elder
son. "He was in the field, and as he came and drew near to the house, he
heard music and dancing. And he called one of the servants and asked
what this meant.

"The servant said to him, 'Your brother has come, and your father has
killed the fatted calf, because he has received him safe and sound'"
(Luke 15:25-27).

St. Augustine comments: "But he was angry and refused to go in. Are you
not moved by the celebration in the father\'s house? The banquet with
the fatted calf, has this not given you pause? No one will exclude you
from the banquet. It all is for nothing, however. The elder son becomes
furious and will not go in" (St. Augustine, *Sermon 11*).

In his fit of pique, he reveals his deepest motivation: "Look, these
many years I have served you, and I never disobeyed your command; yet
you never gave me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends. But
when this son of yours comes, who has devoured your living with harlots,
you killed for him the fatted calf" (Luke 15:28-30).

The father in the parable is God. He always has His arms outstretched,
being full of mercy. The younger son is the image of the sinner who
converts to God.

And the elder son? He is the worker who has labored in the fields, but
without joy. He has served because he had to serve. Over the course of
time, his heart has grown cold. His sense of charity has evaporated. His
brother has become "this son of yours."

He is like salt which has lost its savor. There is a striking contrast
between the magnanimity of the father and the meanness of the elder son.

Serving God and enjoying His friendship should be a continual feast. The
Second Vatican Council in *Lumen gentium* said, "To serve is to reign"
(Vatican II, *Lumen gentium*, Point 36, November 21, 1964).

The elder son represents those who forget that serving God is a
tremendous honor. In the act of service is to be found a good measure of
the compensation.

"His father says to him, 'Son, you are always with me, and all that is
mine is yours' (Luke 15: 31). Therefore, all honor and glory are ours if
we are really of God" (St. Augustine, *Sermon 11*).

God Himself will give us of His riches. What more can we ask for?

"Each one of us must do as he has made up his mind, not reluctantly or
under compulsion" says St. Paul, "for God loves a cheerful giver" (2
Cor. 9:7).

There are always many reasons for us to celebrate if we truly live in
the presence of God. We have a special opportunity to be magnanimous in
our dealings with those closest to us.

St. Teresa of Lisieux said, "How sweet a joy it is to think that God is
just. In other words, He makes allowances for our weaknesses and
understands perfectly the frailty of our humanity.

"So what have I to be afraid of? If God, who is perfectly just, shows
such mercy in forgiving the prodigal son, must He not also be just to me
'who am always with Him' (Luke 15:31)?" (Thérèse of Lisieux,
*Autobiography of a Soul*).

As we finish our prayer, we can turn with confidence to Our Lady, the
perfect model of loving correspondence to the Christian vocation.

The *Catechism of the Catholic Church* says that in Mary we find the
model of all virtues (cf. *Catechism*, Point 829; Vatican II, *Lumen
gentium*, Point 65, November 21, 1964).

Mary, may you remove effectively from our soul any shadow of
lukewarmness. May you guide the angels to make us diligent in God\'s
service, so that we might always be in our family, in our workplace, in
society, the salt that God has planned us to be.

*I thank you my God for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, St
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Amen.*\
\
*MML*
