---
layout: homily
title: "The Annunciation"
---


By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

"In the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was sent by God to a town in
Galilee called Nazareth, to a virgin betrothed to a man named Joseph of
the house of David. The virgin\'s name was Mary. He went in and said,
'Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with you.' She was deeply
disturbed by these words and asked herself what this greeting could
mean.

"But the angel said to her, 'Mary, do not be afraid, for you have found
favor with God. You are to conceive in your womb and bear a son, and you
must name him Jesus. He will be great and will be called the Son of the
Most High. The Lord God will give him the throne of his ancestor David.
He will rule over the house of Jacob forever and his reign will have no
end" (Luke 1:26-33).

Today is the Feast of the Annunciation. It\'s a Solemnity. It\'s the
feast of the vocation of Our Lady, when the angel Gabriel announced to
her on the part of God that she was to be the Mother of God.

This is her calling. It\'s a day for us to be mindful of our own
calling: our own vocation---our Christian vocation, our marriage
vocation, our professional vocation---but ultimately, our vocation to
holiness and apostolate.

The way that Our Lady responds to her vocation is a model of how our
response to our vocation should be at each moment of our life.

Pope St. John Paul liked to say that Our Lady\'s vocation was like "a
pilgrimage of faith," a journeying forward to a new destination (John
Paul II, Encyclical, *Redemptoris Mater*, March 25, 1987).

And so, our vocation is also called to be a pilgrimage of faith, a
journeying forward, day by day, month by month, challenge by challenge.

We can have great faith in our vocation---the fact that God has called
us to realize that this is His will for us, that I would be here in this
place at this moment in time, in this period of history, in this
marriage, in this family, in this job, with these financial constraints,
with this health situation, at my age. This is all the will of God for
me.

There\'s a calling every day with its own graces that are there to help
me to be holy.

We\'re told by St. Paul to the Galatians: "But when the fullness of time
was come, God sent his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, that he
might redeem those who were under the law, that we might receive
adoption as children" (Gal. 4:5).

This is "the fullness of time." It\'s one of the greatest moments in the
whole of human history, when God becomes man.

A kindergarten teacher was teaching her class one time, some little
girls, preparing them for First Holy Communion. She explained what was
going to happen on their First Communion Day, and also explained to them
a feast on that particular week, which was the Feast of the
Annunciation. She told them how the angel Gabriel came down to visit Our
Lady, and then baby Jesus began to grow inside Our Lady. He grew and
grew and grew, and nine months later, on the 25th of December, He was
born.

Tthe following week, the teacher asked these little girls what was going
to happen on their First Communion Day. One little girl said: "I\'m
going to receive Jesus beside me."

The teacher said: "Beside you? Why not within you?"

And she said: "Well, I don\'t want Him to grow and grow and grow."

So the teacher had to explain that that only happened with Our Lady.

When we receive Jesus, we receive Him spiritually, sacramentally,
really, truly, and substantially, but not physically. And so, "the Word
became flesh" (John 1:14).

At that particular moment, when Our Lady said yes, initially she didn\'t
understand. "Mary said to the angel: 'But how can this come about, since
I do not know man?'" (Luke 1:34).

All the saints down through history have suggested this was an
expression of the purity of Our Lady---again, a model of modesty and
purity and chastity for us.

"The angel answered: 'The Holy Spirit will come upon you and the power
of the Most High will overshadow you. For the child will be holy and
will be called the Son of God. I tell you this too, your cousin
Elizabeth, also in her old age, has conceived a son, and she whom people
call barren is now in her sixth month. For nothing is impossible to
God'" (Luke 1:35-37).

Mary is the recipient of a Trinitarian revelation: "The Holy Spirit will
come down upon you and the power of the Most High will overshadow you.
The child will be holy and will be called the Son of God."

Mary is being invited to be the Container of the Uncontainable, as
Cardinal Pell has recently described her in his recent book. She\'s been
given a great challenge, a great calling, but something that is a bit
mysterious, the consequences of which she can\'t possibly fully grasp,
like any one of us with our vocation.

Somebody told me once that following a vocation is like jumping off a
cliff. When you look with a human perspective, from the cliff edge you
see the waves down below crashing against the rocks.

Maybe there\'s a wind that blows in there from the ocean, goes upwards
and can lift you out of it. From a human perspective, you see the wind,
the waves, the swell, the rocks, so many things that don\'t look at all
inviting.

But he said, "Our Lady is standing six meters out from the edge of the
cliff. She has her arms open and she\'s saying: 'Jump, jump into my
arms!'"

Following a vocation is like jumping off a cliff, leaving the terra
firma, the firm, solid land and clay that\'s under our feet, and
launching ourselves out into the unknown. But Our Lady is there to catch
us.

Her vocation is a model for all vocations. It\'s a story of calling, a
story of beauty, of purity, of faith, of generosity, of humility---where
God wants us to react like she did and say yes, and to realize that
nothing is impossible with God.

All the things that might seem so challenging, all the difficulties, can
get blown away in a second.

St. Paul tells us as Eve was the mother of all humanity (Gen. 3:20),
doomed to sin (Rom. 5:12), so now Mary becomes the mother of the new
Adam (1 Cor. 15:45) who will be the father of a new humanity by His
grace (Rom. 5:15).

"God spoke to man down through the ages through the Old Testament. He
revealed himself to man and now God becomes man" (cf. Heb. 1:1-2).

Revelation becomes personified in the person of Christ through Mary.
This child to be conceived in her womb is the fulfillment of all God\'s
promises. He will be "great" and will be the "Son of the Most High: and
"King" and His name shall be called "Jesus" (Luke 1:31-32), which means
"the Lord saves" because "He will save his people from their sins"
(Matt. 1:21).

The promise of an everlasting kingdom in the house of David is fulfilled
in the King to be born in Mary\'s womb. Mary realizes she\'s hearing
something beyond her capability. It will surely take a miracle that
surpasses all that God has done previously.

Our Lady is left wondering, "How can this be, since I know not man?" She
is not doubtful or skeptical. She\'s just trying to find out a little
bit more, trying to understand this great mystery that God has placed
before her.

And then we have the response of Our Lady: "Behold the handmaid of the
Lord, be it done to me according to your word."

Our Lady is a true hearer of the Word. She immediately responds with
faith and trust. We\'re told later that she kept all these things
carefully in her heart (Luke 2:19, 51).

In the moment that God speaks to us in our life, we also have to keep
those words carefully in our heart, to remember the moment when God lit
the candle of our vocation in our heart, a new light in our life that
helps us to understand the meaning and the purpose of what our whole
existence is about.

This prompt response of "yes" to the divine message is a model of faith
for all believers. Mary believed God\'s promises, even when they seemed
impossible.

On this feast day, we can ask Our Lady to increase our faith.

Blessed Álvaro del Portillo, writing about Our Lady in 1987, said, "At
Nazareth, we contemplate the divine mission of Gabriel to whom Mary
responds with heroic faith interwoven with a limitless humility,
confessing her own nothingness. 'Behold the handmaid of the Lord.' The
Virgin Mary shows herself to be totally identified with God\'s plan to
the point of immediately assenting with unshakable trust in God to what
the Archangel has announced."

We can ask Our Lady that we might also be totally identified with God\'s
plan, whatever that might be, in the course of our life and
vocation---that we grow in our trust, in our abandonment, in our faith,
putting that faith into practice in concrete situations.

He continues, "That is the way our faith should be whenever we are
confronted by obstacles in our Christian mission. It must be a firm and
humble faith, born of a sincere conviction of our personal incapacity
before such a great task, and at the same time full of assurance that
what God asks of us can be done, because we count not on our poor
strength, but on God\'s omnipotence."

If you look at the history of the Church down through history, you find
that people of the Church have been people of great faith.

They\'ve "launched out into the deep" (Luke 5:4) to do all sorts of
wonderful things, especially in education and health care, to build up a
civilization of love in so many countries of the world, to bring the
message of the Gospel to those places, to people who otherwise might
never have heard it---and all of this, in the face of what might seem to
be insurmountable difficulties.

"Let us recall," he says, "the cry of St. Josemaría: 'What is needed
today are people of faith.' He calls your attention to it, and my
attention also. He expressly demands it from each one of us when
difficulties grow to be enormous, when we lower our sights, when human
considerations, often artful considerations, make us turn back and seem
to force us into reasoning with purely worldly logic.

"Though apparently coherent, this logic is born of our love of comfort
and responds to the cries of the old person who resists facing God
because to live in this way would make them see clearly the need to cut
the fine threads or the heavy cables that try to shackle us to the
mirages of earthly existence.

"Faith, my child, faith. Faith like that of Mary. Even if at times you
don\'t understand, be convinced, absolutely certain, that everything
worldly is nothing. It is sadness, egoism, sensuality compared to the
task of God to which we are called."

Our Lady responds with this great faith. She doesn\'t look at the
difficulties. She was willing and eager to do God\'s will, even if it
seemed costly. She was full of grace because she trusted that what God
said was true and would be fulfilled.

We can ask Our Lady that also we might live the life of grace. Mary was
the most beautiful creature that God ever created because she was full
of grace, immune from sin, conceived without original sin.

Her fullness of grace can lead us to yearn for that grace that\'s
available to us in the sacraments in a regular way---to always live the
life of grace, and if we ever have the misfortune to fall out of the
state of grace, to get back into the state of grace as soon as possible.

Mary is the Mother of God, because God becomes Incarnate and He takes on
flesh in her womb.

Pope St. John Paul liked to talk about how the Word became flesh. He
gives great importance to human nature, to our human body, in his
*Theology of the Body*, because "the Word became flesh."

A mother was going out to Mass one day and she told her little girl that
she\'d be back later; she was going to receive Jesus. Every day she told
her little child: "I\'m going to receive Jesus."

One day the little girl piped up and says: "And will you receive Mary
also?" The mother was a bit perplexed. She didn\'t quite know how to
answer that question.

One time she met St. Josemaría and put that question to him. She said,
"Father, what will I tell my daughter?"

He thought for a moment, because he wasn\'t often asked that type of
question, and he said: "In a way, yes. You can tell her that you\'re
also going to receive Mary, because the blood of Christ before was the
blood of Mary. You won\'t find that in any theology textbook, but it\'s
a very nice, pietistic thought and one full of faith, and very true at
the same time."

Unity between the two. Mary gave Jesus her blood.

When we pray the Creed every Sunday, the Nicene Creed that dates from
the year 315---it's seventeen centuries old, that prayer---we state our
Confession of Faith in this great mystery:

"For us men and for our salvation, he came down from heaven. By the
power of the Holy Spirit he became incarnate of the Virgin Mary, and was
made man."

God gives us His grace. He expects us to respond with the same
willingness, obedience and heartfelt trust as Mary did.

When God commands, He also gives the help, the strength, and the means
to respond.

But we\'re also free. We can yield to His grace, or we can resist and go
our own way. We can ask Our Lady for that grace to correspond like she
did.

Pope St. John Paul, in an Apostolic Letter called *The Dignity of
Women*, says: "The sending of this Son, one in substance with the
Father, as a man 'born of woman', constitutes the culminating and
definitive point of God\'s self-revelation to humanity. \... A woman is
found to be at the center of this salvific event" (John Paul II,
*Mulieris Dignitatem*, August 15, 1988).

It\'s interesting how Pope St. John Paul points out the central role of
women. In many ways, the Church is always lifting up women, talking
about the key role they have in the whole message of salvation.

He said: "Do we not find in the Annunciation at Nazareth the beginning
of that definitive answer by which God himself attempts to calm
people\'s hearts? It is not just a matter here of God\'s words revealed
through the Prophets; rather, with this response 'the Word is truly made
flesh' (cf. John 1:14).

"Hence, Mary attains a union with God that exceeds all the expectations
of the human spirit. It even exceeds the expectations of all Israel, in
particular the daughters of this Chosen People, who, on the basis of the
promise, could hope that one of their number would one day become the
mother of the Messiah. Who among them\...could have imagined that the
promised Messiah would be 'the Son of the Most High'?

"On the basis of the Old Testament\'s monotheistic faith, such a thing
was difficult to imagine. Only by the power of the Holy Spirit, who
'overshadowed' her, was Mary able to accept what is 'impossible with
men, but not with God'" (cf. Mark 10:27).

St. John Paul says, "The 'fullness of time' manifests the extraordinary
dignity of the woman." He liked to say that Our Lady was God\'s first
Opus Dei in the order of creation.

"This dignity consists in the supernatural elevation to union with God
in Jesus Christ, which determines the ultimate finality of the existence
of every person both on earth and in eternity. From this point of view,"
he says, "the woman is the representative and the archetype of the whole
human race: she represents the humanity which belongs to all human
beings, both men and women."

"On the other hand," he says, "\...the event at Nazareth highlights a
form of union with the living God which can only belong to the woman,
Mary: the union between mother and son. The Virgin of Nazareth truly
becomes the Mother of God. This truth, which Christian faith has always
accepted from the beginning, was solemnly defined at the Council of
Ephesus in the year 431."

All these truths of our faith---very clear, very true, very ancient.

"In the expression 'handmaid of the Lord' one can sense Mary\'s complete
awareness of being a creature of God."

He says, "The word 'handmaid', near the end of the Annunciation
dialogue, is inscribed throughout the whole history of the Mother and
the Son. In fact, this Son, who is the true and consubstantial 'Son of
the Most High', will often say of himself, especially at the culminating
moment of his mission: 'The Son of Man came not to be served, but to
serve'" (Mark 10:45).

This moment of the Incarnation and the Annunciation is the starting
point of our divinization. We\'re not mere passive bystanders at the
Incarnation, but rather, by becoming "partakers of His divine nature" (2
Pet. 1:4), we may work with Christ to rebuild the world for the glory of
the Father.

Some spiritual writers have liked to say that Mary is "like the dawn."
She heralds the coming of the "Sun of Justice" (Mal. 4:2). She did not
just receive the light of God, but she received God Himself, and that\'s
why she shines so much. She gave birth to the Light.

Mary is a true hearer of the Word and immediately responds with faith
and trust. She believed God\'s promises even when they seemed
impossible. She was full of grace because she trusted that what God said
was true and would be fulfilled.

We can celebrate this day as a day of great joy and perhaps imagine the
scene that St. Josemaría liked to encourage people to do: Imagine how
the Lady of the Sweet Name is absorbed in prayer, and then the angel
appears to her. We follow that dialogue.

"Without God\'s help,\" we\'re told in *The Forge*, "it is impossible to
live a clean life. God wants us to be humble, and to ask him for his
help through our Mother, who is his Mother.

"You should say to Our Lady, right now, speaking without the sound of
words, from the accompanied solitude of your heart: 'O, my Mother,
sometimes this poor heart of mine rebels. \... But if you help me\...'
