---
layout: homily
title: "Infectious Faith"
---

By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

There\'s an old Native American legend that says that one day there was
a big fire in the forest. All the animals fled in terror in all
directions, because it was a very violent fire.

Suddenly the jaguar saw a hummingbird pass over his head, but in the
opposite direction. The hummingbird flew towards the fire.

Whatever happened, he wouldn\'t stop. Moments later, the jaguar saw him
pass again, but this time in the same direction as the jaguar was
walking. He could observe this coming and going until he decided to ask
the bird about it because it seemed very bizarre behavior.

"What are you doing, hummingbird?" he asked.

"I\'m going to the lake," he answered. "I drink water with my beak and
throw it on the fire to extinguish it."

The jaguar laughed. "Are you crazy? Do you really think you can put out
that big fire on your own with your very small beak?"

"No," said the hummingbird, "I know I can\'t. But the forest is my home.
It feeds me. It shelters me and my family. I am very grateful for that.
And I help the forest grow by pollinating its flowers.

"I am part of her, and the forest is part of me. I know I can\'t put out
the fire, but I must do my part."

At that moment, the forest spirits who listened to the hummingbird were
moved by this little bird and its devotion to the forest. Miraculously,
they sent a torrential downpour, which put an end to the great fire.

It seems that Native American grandmothers would occasionally tell this
story to their grandchildren, and then conclude with, "Do you want to
attract miracles into your life? Then do your part."

"You have no responsibility to save the world or find solutions to all
problems, but to attend to your particular personal corner of the
universe. And as each person does that, the world saves itself" (Jane
Roberts, *Dreams*).

May we all do our part with grace and gratitude. Our Lord has told us,
"If you had faith the size of a mustard seed, you could say to this
mountain, 'Move,' and it would move" (cf. Matt. 17:20).

From this story, we could think of each of ourselves as hummingbirds,
with our small beaks, with our tiny efforts. What can I do? I have to do
my part, in the Church and in the world. God has given me this
particular part to do.

I don\'t know how my part is going to influence other people, or maybe
some great supernatural forces, for good, for truth, for beauty, for
love in the world; or how, because I do my little part, with my little
beak, doing what I can, that\'s going to create a revolution some place,
a revolution of love, and of doctrine, of truth, all over the world.

This is what the Catholic Church is for.

There was an article in the newspaper yesterday that a religious order
in New York was closing down an order of nuns.

They felt after 150 years they had fulfilled their role. It was founded
by St. Elizabeth Ann Seton, one of the first great saints of the United
States of North America. Now the nuns were few and they were elderly;
they felt that it was time to call it a day.

But then the next paragraph said that in the last one hundred fifty
years, this religious order of nuns had founded one hundred fifty
schools, twenty-eight hospitals, a university of liberal arts, and a few
more things.

If you look at the history of one religious order over time, you will
find something incredible.

In the Catholic Church, we have an awful lot to be proud of, of what
many people, with their small beaks like hummingbirds, have contributed
with their corporate effort: the education and health care of millions
and millions and millions, building up countries, building up societies.

Like the hummingbird, we\'re called to function with faith, to have an
infectious faith that infects other people, maybe astounds other people.

We should also have a great sense of gratitude for what we have
received, like this hummingbird is very grateful for the forest: "The
forest is my home. It feeds me. It shelters me and my family."

Each one of us should look at what we have received from the Catholic
Church, our parents, grandparents, and maybe great-grandparents before
us; in terms of values, education, truth, love, beauty, in learning, in
art, in culture, in values, in morality, in social customs that help us
to live like human beings. There\'s an enormous treasure there from
which we have benefited.

Like the hummingbird, we have to have a great sense of responsibility
and faith that if we do our part, if we live a life of virtue, if we
struggle for holiness, if we take our apostolate very seriously, then
God is going to move all the spirits, the angels and the saints, and all
the graces from the Holy Spirit, to bring about wonderful miracles in
the world.

We can ask Our Lord that we might grow in our infectious faith.

Faith is a reality that\'s a little paradoxical. On the one hand, it\'s
a simple thing, a disposition of the heart often lived through
detachment, sometimes dryness.

But on the other hand, it\'s a very beautiful, fruitful reality, because
faith, the act of faith, truly puts us in contact with God and opens us
little by little to all the depth and the richness of the mystery of
God.

With our little effort of faith put into practice, we can move much
greater and mighty forces---the forces of heaven.

Faith is the only light that never deceives us. It\'s our true strength.
It allows us to lean on God, so that we ask Him for the miracles that
are needed to change society, to change the world, to change minds and
hearts, even when everything seems irredeemable.

We could say that in a sense, all our sins and all our faults come from
a lack of faith.

The jaguar in the story seems to be small on faith. Maybe he\'s big in
power and speed, provoking fear in other people. He\'s one of the lords
of the forest. But when it comes to faith and moving the world, he seems
a bit powerless.

Sometimes we don\'t believe enough in God\'s power and love. In the end,
that may be the source of all our problems.

It's true that we sometimes live through difficult and painful
circumstances which can be tough to confront.

We also experience our own weaknesses and frailty. But these
difficulties are not our real problem.

Our only problem is our lack of faith. If we live through our
difficulties and personal limits with faith, if we put them in God\'s
hands with full trust, He will take care of us.

And even those events in our lives that seem to be the most negative can
wind up being positive. "If you had faith as big as a mustard seed, you
would say to this mountain, 'Move from here to there,' and it would
move" (Matt. 17:20).

What Our Lord most reproaches the disciples for is not their human
weakness, but their lack of faith.

In the Gospel of St. John, we find a whole list of things and benefits
that come from faith:

"He who believes...is not judged, but passes from death to life" (John
5:24).

He walks in the light (1 John 15:7). He has eternal life (John 5:24). He
is never thirsty (John 4:14). Even if he dies, he will live (John
11:25). He will see the glory of God (John 11:40).

He is already resurrected. He will do works like Christ did, and even
still greater ones (cf. John 14:12), and is victorious over the world;
this is the great victory, our faith (cf. 1 John 5:4).

At the end of the Gospel of John, he says, "Now Jesus did many other
signs in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this
book, but these are written so that you may come to believe that Jesus
is the Messiah, the Son of God, and that through believing, you may have
life in his name" (John 20:30-31).

"Life in His name." This is what is essential. Faith gives us life. Real
life on this earth; the eternal life of the kingdom.

It puts us in contact with God. It lets us touch God, and Our God is the
God of life.

There is a very personal, intimate dimension to an act of faith. No one
can believe on my behalf.

In this personal act of faith, there are two inseparable aspects:
obedience and trust.

It is an act of obedience, because to believe is to accept the truth
that surpasses me. I am not the master.

It means submitting my intelligence to the light of God, letting myself
be led by Him. It means making Him the Lord of my life.

In the Letter to the Hebrews, it is said about Abraham, "By faith,
Abraham obeyed when he was called to set out for a place that he was to
receive as an inheritance. He set out not knowing where he was going"
(Heb. 11:8).

Faith can be a beautiful adventure. We don't always know where it will
lead us.

This act of faith is also an act of trust. We know that God loves us,
and that He wants our happiness.

To believe is to trust, to place ourselves in the hands of God, like
little children who surrender themselves into their Father\'s arms.

We also must note that even if faith is a very personal belonging to
God, it has within its content the objective side of faith: an important
community dimension. My faith is the faith of the Church.

Today, sometimes we have the tendency to make up our own, personal
beliefs according to our tastes and the times. We take a little bit of
this and a little bit of that, as it pleases us, in order to make up our
little religion.

But this isn't the Christian faith. My faith is not an individualistic
reality that I have made up. It is something that I receive. My faith is
the faith of Mary, the faith of the apostles.

It is the faith that the Church transmits from generation to generation.
It is one that I can\'t cover with my own little sauce, or it loses its
force and its beauty.

This faith can be expressed differently during different times by
different cultures. But it\'s one faith in its essentials.

St. Paul says to the Ephesians, "Just as you were called to the one hope
of your calling: one Lord, one faith, one baptism; one God and Father of
all, who is above all, and through all, and in all" (Eph. 4:4-6).

So, growing in faith, getting to the fullness of faith little by little,
according to the expression in the Letter to the Hebrews, is then a
double movement.

One part is an act of belonging to God that\'s more or less personal,
free, deep, and living; and the other part, a better understanding of
the content and richness of our faith.

May our intellect always be more and more open with joy to all the
mysteries of the Gospel and the Christian faith.

The two aspects of faith: the subjective aspect, this personal act of
belonging; and the objective aspect, the content of faith, the truth to
which we adhere, are closely linked to each other.

Pope Benedict said, "There exists a profound unity between the act by
which we believe and the content to which we give our assent" (Benedict
XVI, Apostolic Letter, *Porta Fidei*, October 11, 2011).

The more sincere and profound the personal act of belonging, of trust,
and obedience, the more the richness of the content of faith is revealed
and becomes accessible.

And the converse is also true. The more the content of faith is
discovered in its truth, its richness, and its beauty, the more the act
of belonging, of putting oneself in the hands of God and be strong and
free, and will truly realize its fruitfulness.

Faith is an adventure, and we don\'t know where it will lead us. At the
same time, it offers us great security because it puts us in the arms of
Our Father God and gathers us in the light that doesn\'t mislead, the
certitude of the truths that God brings forth in our lives.

Faith is partly a gift from God, a grace, and also, partly a personal
decision. We\'re told in St. John, "No one can come to me unless drawn
by the Father who sent me" (John 6:44).

Faith is a gift from Our Father God because the Holy Spirit lights our
hearts so that we can believe (cf. *Catechism of the Catholic Church*,
Point 153).

Faith is a gift of God\'s mercy. It\'s not based on personal merit.
It\'s simply a gift that He gives us, either through our education, from
our family, or by the grace of a moment of conversion.

The true believer is never someone who judges or disdains others because
they don\'t believe. The believer knows that faith was given freely. The
believer thanks the Lord for faith and doesn\'t allow a conceited
self-estimation.

Pope Francis has said, "One who believes may not be presumptuous; on the
contrary, truth leads to humility, since believers know that rather than
ourselves possessing truth, it is the truth that embraces and possesses
us" (Pope Francis, Encyclical, *Lumen fidei*, June 29, 2013).

But this gift also comes through a personal decision. Faith is also a
decision by a person, a fully human act. It\'s an act that is possible,
thanks to God\'s help, but an act that also implicates our freedom, our
intelligence, and our will.

There are moments in life when faith is natural, easy. But there are
other moments when it may be a courageous decision, a fight.

We could have a thousand reasons to doubt, to not trust God, to revolt
against Him. But in spite of that, we decide to believe.

This fight is what St. Thérèse of Lisieux lived at the end of her life.
She entered into a very sorrowful period full of suffering and trials,
not only because of her sickness, but also because of strong temptations
against faith and hope.

She used to say things like, "I have made more acts of faith in the last
year than during all the rest of my life" (Thérèse of Lisieux, *The
Story of A Soul)* and "I believe what I want to believe."

She always carried with her the Creed written in her own blood to show
her determination to believe in spite of the suffering and the doubts
that tormented her.

Her faithfulness in believing was certainly a gift of God. But she had
to put all her courage and determination into it as well.

We all have similar moments when faith can no longer be a
convenience---the habit of thinking---but when it must be a courageous
decision.

These moments may not be pleasant to live through. But it is during
these moments that faith really becomes a personal choice, that it gets
deeper, and that it matures into an adult faith.

Another one of faith\'s paradoxes is that it is both light and darkness.
It is a great light, the most precious of all light, because it gives us
access to the truth about God, about the profound sense to our life, and
how to orient it.

Faith lights our way and enlightens our decisions, but it is also
darkness. Many of faith\'s truths surpass our intelligence, our capacity
to understand.

St. Paul says: "O, the depths of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of
God! How unsearchable are his judgments and how inscrutable his ways!"
(Rom. 11:33).

Faith is not contrary to intelligence but surpasses it. It makes us
accept truths larger than intelligence can grasp.

Living in faith means "walking in light" (1 John 1:7). But it doesn\'t
mean we can understand everything, explain everything, master
everything. Far from it.

Sometimes we see what we believe. But sometimes we must "believe without
seeing" (John 20:29), to accept plodding along in a bit of darkness
while putting all our trust in God.

We can\'t dissociate faith from the other two theological virtues: hope
and charity. These virtues are called the theological virtues because
they unite us to God, letting us enter into God\'s life.

They are a gift from God, but also a decision by man. They are truly the
heart of Christian life, as St. Paul highlights in his letters.

Charity---love---is the ultimate goal, whereas faith and hope will pass
away. When we are in heaven, we won\'t need faith anymore because we
will see God; and we won\'t need hope anymore because we will already
possess everything for which we hoped. Only love will remain.

But in our journey on the earth, love cannot do without faith and hope,
since it relies on them. Faith engenders hope, and faith and hope give
us the strength to love.

Faith and hope are like the two wings that let love take flight,
carrying it ever higher.

But if faith and hope diminish, love will grow cold. A lack of fervor,
of generosity, often comes from discouragement, from a loss of faith and
hope. We don\'t believe anymore, so we lower our arms.

When we are fearful, doubtful, worried, or discouraged, the heart closes
and becomes incapable of loving.

We also have to recognize that loving isn\'t always easy, and that some
acts of love, like forgiveness or love of enemies, require a lot of hope
and faith.

We can also say that in another sense, faith itself is a product of
love. The deepest expression of love is openness to another and trust.

The more love grows, the stronger trust becomes. True faith is already
in itself an act of love. It makes us accept God in His divine truth and
permits us to give ourselves to Him, to return to Him with trust and
obedience.

The faith described in the Gospel is inseparable from love. St. James
says, "Without works of love, it is a dead faith" (James 2:26). We speak
of a faith immersed in love, saturated by love.

St. John of the Cross speaks of "the faith with which we love God
without understanding him" (St. John of the Cross, *Spiritual
Canticle*).

Pope Benedict has said, "Faith without charity bears no fruit, while
charity without faith would be a sentiment constantly at the mercy of
doubt. Faith and charity each require the other in such a way that each
allows the other to set out along its respective path" (Benedict XVI,
Apostolic Letter, *Porta fidei*, October 11, 2011).

John Paul II liked to call Our Lady the Woman of Faith and liked to say
that she was a woman of faith that is put into practice (John Paul II,
*Prayer to Our Lady of Lourdes*, August 15, 2004).

We could ask Our Lady that we might, like the hummingbird, have a
greater and more effective faith, so that we can stir many people around
us to be aware of the great things we have received, to do our part to
spread faith in this world and to future generations.

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, Saint
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*VA*
