---
layout: homily
title: "The Holy Innocents"
---

By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

"After they had left, suddenly the angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph
in a dream and said, 'Get up, take the child and his mother with you,
and escape into Egypt, and stay there until I tell you, because Herod
intends to search for the child and do away with him.'Joseph got up and,
taking the child and his mother with him, left that night for Egypt,
where he stayed until Herod was dead. This was to fulfill what the Lord
had spoken through the prophet: 'I called my son out of Egypt'" (Matt.
2:13-15).

No sooner has Our Lord been born on this earth than there is
contradiction. The angel of the Lord again appears to Joseph, and again
in a dream, and gives him an indication that he is again going to change
all their plans.

They might have been planning to go back peacefully to Nazareth, and
after all the commotion and turmoil of the previous days, finally, their
lives are settling down a little. But he\'s told to "take the child and
his mother with you" and escape to Egypt. It\'s a story of
contradiction, of difficulties, of the Cross.

The story that had preceded the birth of Christ is now continuing. The
Holy Family is beginning to see how the words of Simeon are going to be
fulfilled: "Thy own soul a sword will pierce" (Luke 2:35). He is truly
to be a sign of contradiction.

The powers that be of this world, the political powers, are out to get
the Child, to search for the Child and do away with Him.

As always, Joseph obeys, and he obeys immediately: "Joseph got up and
taking the child and his mother with him, he left that night for Egypt"
(Matt. 2:13-14).

Again, we see the Holy Family, people in Scripture, when they see the
will of God, they move with urgency. He stayed there.

We don\'t understand the plans of God. This sign of contradiction that
comes on this particular feast day is a mystery. But God is speaking to
us about suffering, that reality in our life, and the sanctification of
it.

St. Matthew continues: "Herod, when he saw that he had been tricked by
the wise men, was in a furious rage, and he sent and killed all the male
children in Bethlehem and in all that region who were two years old or
under, according to the time which he had ascertained from the wise men"
(Matt. 2:16).

Herod becomes a real butcher. Unfortunately, so many people in the
medical profession today follow in the footsteps of Herod. Mother Teresa
liked to say that people who perform abortions, or vote for them, or
condone them, politicians, who approve of them, are just a bunch of
assassins.

We could remember today the millions and millions of unborn babies whose
lives have been terminated.

Also, we could remember the words of John Paul II in *Evangelium Vitae*,
the Gospel of Life*,* where he tells all followers of Christ that they
have to be "unconditionally pro-life."

Today is a good day to see: What have I done in the past year to have an
influence in that area? Do people around me know that I am
unconditionally pro-life? Have I tried to influence my environment with
letters to the newspaper, with participation in pro-life activities, by
being in contact with people of a similar bent, and of getting more and
more informed through social media about the brutality of this whole
culture that is so prevalent in society?

There\'s no easy explanation for suffering, least of all for the
suffering of the innocent.

It\'s scientifically very clear that life begins at conception. It\'s
been that way for decades. Every day it becomes more and more
scientifically clear that babies in the womb begin to feel pain at a
very early age.

All these things are things we have to get to know more about so that we
change the culture. We bring about "a culture of life," as John Paul II
liked to say (John Paul II, Encyclical, *Evangelium vitae*, March 25,
1995), and "the civilization of love" (John Paul II, *Letter to
Families*, February 2, 1994; *Apostolic Letter*, *Salvifici doloris*,
Point 30, February 11, 1984; *Catechesis*, June 8, 1994).

St. Matthew, in his description of this event, shows us the suffering,
apparently useful and unjust, of some children who give their lives for
a Person and for a Truth whom they didn\'t even know.

Suffering is often a cause of scandal. For many people, it\'s like a
great wall which prevents them from seeing God and His infinite love for
men. Why doesn\'t Almighty God prevent such apparently useless
suffering?

Suffering is indeed a mystery. Yet through faith, the Christian can
discover, in the darkness of his own or other people\'s suffering, the
loving and provident hand of his Father God, who knows so much more and
sees so much further than he himself can.

We have to try and see suffering from a supernatural perspective. God is
at work here. He\'s using me or He\'s using this situation, or this
apparent tragedy or difficulty, or this broken heart, to bring about His
plans, greater plans, plans of divine love.

We have to try and accept those crosses as they come and learn to see
with faith the loving hand of Our Father God behind them.

When through faith we accept these realities, then we begin to
understand to some extent the words of St. Paul to the first Christians
in Rome when he said: "We know that in everything God works for the good
for those who love him" (Rom. 8:28), including everything that seems to
be piercingly inexplicable or incomprehensible.

You may have heard during these days of Christmas, or in other
Christmases, of people whose hearts have been broken over Christmas
because of the loss of a loved one, maybe a young loved one. And yet, we
know God is at work behind all of these things.

Nor must we forget that our greatest happiness and our most authentic
good are not always those which we dream of and long for---what I dream
of, what I want, what I thought was going to happen, how everything was
going to work out as I had planned. We live in a valley of tears, and
God is at work behind those tears.

Often, it\'s difficult for us to see things from their true perspective.
We can only take in a very small part of the complete reality. We only
see the tiny piece of reality that is here in front of us.

We\'re inclined to feel that earthly existence is the only real one and
often consider our time on earth to be the period in which all our
longings for perfect happiness ought to be fulfilled.

But sometimes God uses those contradictions, those heartbreaking
moments, those tragedies, to lead us along deeper spiritual pathways, to
help us to look up and see that there\'s another reality, a supernatural
reality.

Frank Sheed in *To Know Christ Jesus* says: "There is anguish for us,
twenty centuries later, in thinking of the slain babies and their
parents. For the babies the agony was soon over; in the next world, they
would come to know whom they had died to save, and for all eternity
would have that glory. For the parents, the pain would have lasted
longer; but at death they too must have found that there was a special
sense in which God was in their debt, as he had never been indebted to
any. They and their children were the only ones who ever agonized in
order to save God\'s life."

Sometimes God permits broken hearts and hearts filled with pain that
will never be erased in this world. Crosses are burdens that will last
always, but which will lead us along true pathways to holiness.

Suffering comes in many forms. No one willingly looks for it in any of
those forms. Christ who is like us in all things but sin (*cf*. Heb.
4:15) did not yearn for suffering. He said: "Father, if it is possible,
take this chalice away from me. Yet not my will, rather yours be done"
(Matt. 26:39).

And yet, Jesus proclaimed as "blessed"---we can use that word "blessed"
in terms of privileged, happy, or lucky---\"are those who mourn" (Matt.
5:5), that is to say, those who carry a heavier cross of illness, of
handicap, of physical pain, of poverty, of slander, of injustice.

Faith transforms the meaning of suffering. In union with Christ\'s
suffering, it is changed into a sign of God\'s love, into something very
valuable and fruitful.

A man told me in the last few days how he was distributing pieces of
Christmas cake to small children in rural Kenya, and he came across a
young girl, maybe six or seven years of age, who was blind. She had
never had Christmas cake before.

When he realized she was blind, he gave her a few more pieces of the
cake, small little pieces. There were so many kids and all they could
have was a small little piece each, but he gave her a few more pieces.

Each time she would say, 'Thank you, uncle. Thank you, uncle'---grateful
for this little service, for this little joy. You could see he was the
one who was more moved by this young girl who couldn\'t see.

All these children were enjoying themselves at Christmas, and this
little girl also, but a little bit limited in her joy because of her
handicap. Yet Our Lord has called her blessed.

In one of the Antiphons of the Mass of this day, it says: "These have
been redeemed from among the human race as the first fruits of God and
for the Lamb of God. They follow the Lamb wherever he goes" (*Communion
Antiphon*, Holy Mass of December 28).

The Cross, pain and suffering, are the means which Our Lord uses to
redeem us. He could have used other means, but He chose to redeem us
precisely by the Cross.

St. Josemaría liked to say that "suffering is a sign of divine
predilection" (Josemaría Escrivá, *The Way*, Point 959), that God has
loved this person in this special way.

Since then, suffering has had a new meaning, which can only be
understood when it is united to Him. That\'s why it\'s a very good thing
to thank Our Lord for the crosses that He sends us. Thank you, Lord, for
this pain, for this suffering, for this anxiety, for this worry, for
this broken heart, because I know that you\'re acting in it and through
it.

Our Lord had the power to do away with suffering, but He never used that
power for Himself. Although He worked miracles to feed the crowds, He
Himself suffered hunger. He shared with us the experience of exhaustion
and pain.

His soul tasted every bitterness: indifference, ingratitude, betrayal,
slander, moral agony as in its highest degree when He took upon Himself
the sins of the world, the shameful death on the Cross.

His enemies were astonished by His incomprehensible behavior. "He saved
others," they said mockingly, \"He cannot save himself" (Matt. 27:42).

In our situation, in our marriage, in our family, in our social
relations, in our professional work, in sickness, or in financial
problems, when we encounter the same things that Our Lord
encountered---indifference, ingratitude, betrayal, slander, moral
agony---we know to whom we can turn.

We can find solace in the heart of Christ. We can find meaning and
understanding there, and that meaning and understanding can lead us to
thank Our Lord for what He sent us.

After the Resurrection, the Apostles were sent to proclaim the benefits
of the Cross to the whole world. "It was necessary that the Messiah
should suffer like this" (*cf*. Luke 24:26), Christ Himself had
explained these matters to the disciples on the road to Emmaus.

Our Lord wants us to avoid pain and combat illness with all the means at
our disposal. He wants us to use all the human means. But He wants us to
understand, at the same time, that our pain and our suffering can have a
redemptive meaning and can lead to our personal purification, even in
the case of those which seem unjust or out of all proportion.

Fulton Sheen likes to tell the story of a lady at the turn of the 20^th^
century in France, Élisabeth Leseur. Her story is on the Internet. She
was a very normal Catholic lady, but she married a very intelligent man,
a very prestigious man. He was the Chairman of the Communist Party of
France and he was the editor of the Communist newspaper.

She felt she had been given this husband to convert him. She tried to
engage him intellectually, to explain to him from an intellectual
perspective the truths of the faith, but she got nowhere.

After several years of their marriage, she developed a very serious
disease, I don\'t know if it was tuberculosis of the spine or something.
She was in an iron lung for a couple of years. One day she said to her
husband, "After I die, you will convert and become a Catholic."

He remembered thinking that there was nothing further from his mind. He
thought that his wife must be nearing her end. She said, "Because I have
asked God to ask me enough suffering so as to save your soul." She said,
"And after I die, and after you become a Catholic, you will enter a
seminary and you will be ordained a Catholic priest."

He dismissed these as the thoughts of a dying woman. "Definitely my wife
is losing her mind. She\'s nearing her end."

When this good lady died, he had a lot of grief and he wanted somehow to
reconnect with her, with her soul. He decided to go on a tour all over
France and visit all the places they\'d been to on their honeymoon, to
somehow relive those moments, because he truly loved her so much.

On one occasion, he found himself outside a little village church in a
small village somewhere in France. He remembered that on their honeymoon
they\'d gone into the church.

He hated going into churches. It wasn\'t good for him to be seen going
into churches, being such a prominent Communist. But he\'d made a
promise that he would go everywhere that they\'d gone on their
honeymoon, so he went into the church.

In the church, he got this great desire to go to Lourdes. He had no time
for Lourdes. He had dismissed it in his Communist newspaper as a fraud,
one of those Catholic superstitions. But he got this great desire to go
there and so he went to Lourdes.

While standing in front of the grotto of Our Lady of Lourdes, he had a
monumental conversion. So great was the grace of his conversion that the
thought of going back to Paris and resigning from the Chairmanship of
the Communist party and the editorialship of the Communist newspaper
didn\'t cost him a thought.

Three months later, he entered a Dominican seminary. Eventually, he was
ordained a Dominican priest.

Fulton Sheen said, "In 1925, I did my retreat given by that Dominican
priest, Fr. Felix Leseur. It\'s not often in the course of your life
that you attend a retreat where the preacher frequently says during the
retreat, 'As my wife Elizabeth used to say...' His life tells us a great
story of the value of human suffering."

Our Lord wants us to accept the crosses that He sends us. He wants us to
learn how to understand that this has a redemptive meaning.

A lady asked me once, "Father when I turn on my computer, can that be
redemptive?"

Well, if turning on, flicking the switch of your computer, or pressing
the button is redemptive, imagine how much more redemptive can be a
migraine headache, or a broken heart, or some other suffering.

That doctrine filled St. Paul with joy in his prison cell. He said, "Now
I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake, and in my flesh, I complete
what is lacking in Christ\'s afflictions for the sake of his body, that
is, the Church" (Col. 1:24).

Suffering is not sanctified by those who suffer in this life because of
wounded pride, or envy, or jealousy. We may create a lot of suffering
for ourselves, but that\'s not the Cross of Christ. That cross comes
precisely from our being far away from Him. That cross is one\'s own
cross and it\'s heavy and it's fruitless.

We have to examine our conscience and see if it\'s truly Our Lord\'s
Cross that we are carrying wholeheartedly.

Often that Cross of Christ can consist in the tiny irritations that may
turn up in our work or in our dealings with others: divine calls to be a
bit more patient, kind, or understanding.

It may be in things that are unforeseen or for which we\'re not
prepared, or the character of someone with whom we have to live, or a
plan that has to be changed at the last minute, or tools of our work
that fail us in the worst possible moment, or extremes of heat or cold,
or misunderstanding, or being sufficiently off-color to feel incapable
of doing our work properly.

But whether it\'s little or great, suffering accepted and offered to Our
Lord produces peace and serenity. As we see St. Joseph fleeing by night
with the Child and His Mother, carrying that unexpected cross, we also
sense a great peace and serenity, a joy that comes from following the
calling that God has given to him with all of its consequences.

When crosses are not accepted, the soul is out of tune and its internal
rebellion can be shown externally in gloom or bad temper. We have to try
to make a conscious decision to take up and carry the little Cross of
each day with determination.

Sufferings can be sent to us by Our Lord to purify many things of our
past life, or to strengthen our virtues, and to unite us to the
sufferings of Christ Our Redeemer, who, in His innocence, suffered the
punishment due to our sins.

The Holy Innocents were united in some way to the innocence of Christ.
In the Liturgy of today, we say, "O God, on this holy day, on this day
the Holy Innocents gave witness to you, not by words but by a martyr\'s
death" (*cf*. *Opening Prayer*, Mass of December 28).

When we die to ourselves in the martyrdom of the little things of each
day, we also give witness to Christ. Those who suffer with the intention
of co-redeeming are comforted by Our Lord. He sends them peace and
serenity.

St. Josemaría liked to say that joy and happiness in this world have
their roots in the form of a cross *(cf*. J. Escrivá*, The Forge*, Point
28; *Christ Is Passing By*, Point 43). We are called to sympathize with
and help people to overcome their difficulties and their sufferings.

The *Entrance Antiphon* of the Mass of today says: "The innocent
children were put to death in place of Christ. They follow Him, the
sinless Lamb. They praise Him forever, singing glory to you."

Those who suffer with Christ will be rewarded by having God as their
comforter in this life and, afterwards, the infinite joy of eternal
life. St. Matthew tells us that Our Lord says, "Well done, good and
faithful servant. \... Enter into the joy of your master" (Matt. 25:21).

These are words that Our Lord will say to us at the end of our life if
we have managed to remain united to Him through all its joys and
sorrows, the ups and downs.

The Book of Revelation says, "God will wipe away every tear from the
eyes of the blessed and death shall be no more, neither shall there be
mourning, nor crying, nor pain anymore, for the former things have
passed away" (Rev. 21:4).

The hope of heaven is an inexhaustible source of patience and energy at
a time of severe suffering. We see that this is not in vain. This has a
purpose. God is at work here.

In the same way, the knowledge, which faith gives us, that our pain and
suffering are of enormous use to those who live with us, our friends,
our relatives, and it helps us to bear suffering and exhaustion without
complaint.

Joseph went silently to Egypt.

We ought to feel that the weight of our affliction is light, compared to
the good things which God has prepared for us. A lady told me once, "I
thank God for the crosses that He sends me because I realize they could
be worse."

At the moment of our Calvary, God can give us graces to see that things
could be worse and that maybe other people\'s Calvary is greater.

Those who offer up their suffering are co-redeemers with Christ, and God
the Father always pours out on them such great comfort that they\'re
filled with peace in the midst of sufferings. St. Paul says, "For as we
share abundantly in Christ\'s sufferings, so through Christ we share
abundantly in comfort too" (2 Cor. 1:5).

St. Paul felt the consolation of the Divine Mercy, and that enables him
and us to console and support others. Our Father God is always very near
to His human children, but especially when they\'re suffering.

Human fraternity moves us to practice this service of comfort. St. Paul
says to the Thessalonians, "Comfort one another" (1 Thess. 4:18). There
may be a thousand things which tend to separate us, but suffering unites
us.

But it does happen sometimes that a painful situation arises in which we
don\'t know what is the right thing to do. Maybe if we recollect
ourselves in prayer for a moment, and ask ourselves what Our Lord would
do in the same circumstances, we may receive abundant light.

Sometimes all we need to do is to keep the suffering person company, to
talk to them in a friendly and positive way, to encourage them to pray
for others and to offer their suffering for some specific intention, or
to help them to recite some prayer like the Rosary, or to simply listen
to what they have to say.

When many people nowadays have forgotten the Christian meaning of
feasts, we can add to them the light and salt of little mortifications,
realizing that in this way we give joy to Our Lord and help other souls
to come nearer to Bethlehem.

In the *Furrow* we are told, "You asked Our Lord to let you suffer a
little for him. But when suffering comes in such a normal, human
form---family difficulties and problems\...or those awkward things of
ordinary life---you find it hard to see Christ behind it. Open your
hands willingly to those nails\...and your sorrow will be turned into
joy" (J. Escrivá, *Furrow*, Point 234).

St. Josemaría also says, "Don\'t complain if you suffer. It\'s the
prized and valued stone that is polished. Does it hurt? Allow yourself
to be cut, gratefully, because God has taken you in His hands as if you
were a diamond. An ordinary pebble is not worked on like that" *(ibid*.,
Point 235).

We contemplate Mary at the foot of her Son\'s Cross. We will learn to
offer our pain and suffering to Him and to have great sympathy for those
who suffer.

Mary, may you help us to sanctify pain, uniting it to that of your Son,
Jesus. Help us to ask the Holy Innocents, that they may teach us to love
mortification and voluntary sacrifice, so that we offer up our pain and
to have great compassion for all who suffer.

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, Saint
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*VA*
