---
layout: homily
title: "Helping To Do Good"
---


By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

"When he returned to Capernaum, some time later word went around that he
was in the house; and so many people collected that there was no room
left, even in the front of the door. He was preaching the word to them
when some people came bringing him a paralytic carried by four men, but
as they could not get the man to him through the crowd, they stripped
the roof over the place where Jesus was; and when they had made an
opening, they lowered the stretcher on which the paralytic lay. Seeing
their faith, Jesus said to the paralytic, 'My child, your sins are
forgiven'" (Mark 2:1-5).

Christ appears in this passage as the only true liberator.

Four friends bring a paralytic whom they are eager to see rid of a
disease that keeps him on a stretcher. After strenuous effort to carry
him to Jesus, they listen to the words addressed by Our Lord to their
friend: "My son, your sins are forgiven."

It\'s unlikely that they expected to hear this kind of address from the
Master to the invalid, but Christ lets us see that the worst of all
oppressions---the most tragic of all slaveries from which man can
suffer---is sin. It\'s not just one evil among the many other evils that
afflict creatures, but the gravest, the only thing that is evil in
absolute terms.

The men carrying the paralytic understand that Jesus has given their
incapacitated friend the greatest good--- freedom from his own sins. And
we cannot forget what a great contribution to the common good that it is
to do everything possible to exile sin from the world.

On many occasions, the greatest favor, the greatest good we can do to a
friend, to a brother, to parents, to children, is to help them see the
beauty of divine mercy in the sacrament of Penance. It is a good for the
family, for the Church, for the whole of humanity, even though here on
earth very few know about it.

Christ frees from sin with His divine power: "Who can forgive sins
except God?" (Mark 2:7), we're told. It was for this that He came on
earth.

St. Paul says to the Ephesians, "God, who is rich in mercy, out of the
great love with which he loved us, even when we were dead through our
trespasses, made us alive together with Christ" (Eph. 2:4-5).

After forgiving the paralytic his sins, Jesus also cured his physical
infirmity. The man must have understood in that very instant that his
greatest good fortune that day had been the first cure: to have felt his
soul pierced through and through by divine mercy, and to be able to look
at Jesus with a clean heart.

The paralytic was healed body and soul. And his friends are an example
for us of how we should help others---through our friendship mainly,
cooperating in apostolic initiatives, and fostering the good of society
with all the means at our disposal: working for the common good, for a
decent life and culture, offering positive solutions when faced with
evil.

We should do this in our professional circumstances as well as in any
other environment in which we happen to be involved (neighborhood
groups, parent associations, parish organizations). It is here that we
can cooperate in the building up of good and avoid cooperation in
anything evil.

Frequently in social life many may become spectators in the face of the
serious problems that are affecting them, their children, or their
social environment.

We have to ask the Holy Spirit for lights so that we can see things, see
solutions, think ahead, and think out of the box, so that we\'re not
just mere spectators observing the scene. We\'re not just standing on
the sidelines watching other people play the game.

Christ wants us as His followers out on the pitch, playing the game,
scoring the goals. He wants us to be full of initiative.

He doesn\'t want us to be cooperating in evil and in things that might
be illegal: business dealings under the table, prescribing
contraceptives, or performing abortions, or assisting in such
operations, or selling things in our pharmacy that should not be sold,
or teaching children wrong things in classrooms that are not morally
upright.

You have to try and think of all sorts of solutions and create an
environment in our profession whereby those who come after us can find
it easier to lead a good professional life.

"They have the mistaken notion," we\'re told by one spiritual writer,
"that others should be the ones to take the initiative, to stop evil and
to do good. They content themselves with sterile complaint. A Christian
cannot behave in this passive way because he knows that he should be
leaven within society" (Francis Fernandez, *In* *Conversation with God*,
Volume 3).

In the midst of human affairs, what the soul is in the body, Christians
are in the world.

The Second Vatican Council said the positive obligation of cooperating
in good should lead every Christian to bring Christ\'s message to every
human activity---professional work included---in the best way he or she
can (*cf*. Vatican II, *Apostolicam Actuositatem*, Point 16, November
18, 1965).

That may mean starting schools. It might mean starting a hospital or
some other good work that\'s going to help many people---maybe, a
hospice to care for the dying. All of these purposes of these
institutions are to reflect the Christian spirit, to look after people
in a Christian way, and also to make sure that nothing wrong or evil is
done.

The true Christian can\'t just avoid doing evil himself, being careless
about the influence that his actions may have on the behavior of others.
The Christian has to be a leader and has to be seen to be such.

The friends of the paralytic did not limit themselves to not doing evil.
They were full of initiative; they looked for solutions. The sky was the
limit. They act. They help the sick man to get closer to Jesus. They
help him in his desire to get well by paving the way for Our Lord\'s
miracle: "Your sins are forgiven" (Mark 2:5).

I was very impressed many years ago in the living room of the house of a
general practitioner, with two or three other people, to hear him
talking about how he wanted to see if they could insert into the
Constitution a phrase to make sure that abortion could never be
legalized in that country.

From that small gathering, and many other small gatherings with many
other small groups of people, a whole movement was initiated in society
that ended up getting a 70 percent majority of voters to vote in favor
of inserting that clause into the Constitution. That clause lasted for
over 50 years.

It\'s amazing what a few people can do with their initiative. Great
things begin in small ways. And we all have to see how I can cooperate
for the good, to build that "civilization of love" that John Paul II
talked about (John Paul II, *Letter to Families*, February 2, 1994;
*Apostolic Letter*, *Salvifici doloris*, Point 30, February 11, 1984);
the "culture of life" (John Paul II, Encyclical, *Evangelium vitae*,
March 25, 1995).

Cooperating in good implies avoiding any cooperation in evil, not only
in important decisions but also in the small ways that easily lie to
hand: not wasting money---even in only small amounts---on magazines or
newspapers or books or shows or entertainment, which, because of their
sectarian, anti-Christian, or immoral character, damage the soul; buying
one\'s newspaper at a particular newsstand (even if it means a longer
walk) rather than from one where publications are sold attacking the
Church or Christian morals; or avoiding a pharmacy selling
contraceptives; or not buying a certain product (possibly very good)
which is advertised on an immoral or anti-Catholic program on the radio
or TV.

And our action will be even more effective if we suggest a similar line
of conduct to our friends. If lukewarm Christians were to stop buying
certain magazines, publications, and newspapers, many of these would not
survive.

It\'s regrettable that on many occasions, much of the immense damage
caused is being subsidized by Christians, who, at the same time, may
often be complaining about society\'s moral ruin.

It\'s also very good to point out to people in Christian countries, or
formerly Christian countries, how the Christian environment was brought
about by many dedicated people in schools, in hospitals influencing
governments---Christians living out their Christian vocation to the
full.

The Christian has to cooperate in the common good by seeking and
offering positive solutions to the perennial problems; he or she can\'t
limit himself or herself to simply not voting for a party or a program
which attacks Christian family values, or is against freedom in
teaching, or favors legislation directed against life from its
conception.

For some people, it means if they have the capacity, they should go
forward to be active in public life, to make a splash, to leave a mark,
to do what they can.

Many years ago in a country, they were drafting a new constitution, and
thirty-five prominent members of each profession were selected. One
particular person to draft that constitution, one particular person, his
name ended with a V, and he was going to be the last then to vote. There
was an uneven number of votes so if there was a problem, the uneven
number would carry the vote.

These people were debating what concept to put into the Constitution.
Some people supported the idea of having "the greatest good for the
greatest majority," which sounds very good, it sounds democratic, but
the problem with that is what happens to minorities.

So this person with a deep Christian formation was very aware of this
and was also aware that the one Muslim representative of the Muslim
minority in that country had voted in favor of "the greatest good for
the greatest majority."

This person said to this Muslim, "With great respect, Your Honor, if we
have 'the greatest good for the greatest majority,' and the Catholic
majority in this country decide to kill all the Muslims, then
constitutionally that would be correct."

When that was pointed out, the honorable Muslim changed his opinion to
the idea of "the common good," which means the defense of the well-being
of each person in society, no matter who they are or where they\'re
from.

There may be all sorts of opportunities that crop up that we have of
doing good, of sowing the mustard seeds, which can be for the benefit of
many people in society in the long term.

We need to conduct a constant, deep doctrinal apostolate, free from
false prudence, and not be afraid of going against the mainstream in
issues that are vital for society itself and upon which there is often
complete disorientation, or else a partial truth that often causes more
confusion.

A student told me recently how in a class he was attending, the lady
professor was talking about capital punishment, and how we all have to
be against capital punishment and do what we can to remove it.

He put up his hand and asked the teacher, "Miss, are you pro-life or
pro-choice?" She said, "Oh, I\'m pro-choice, of course."

He pointed out the incongruity of being against capital punishment but
being pro-choice. Sometimes the opportunities we have to correct
people\'s thinking can be at arm\'s length.

This amicable apostolate of doctrine, showing affection for everyone,
spreading the teaching of Christ as widely as possible, and making use
of every opportunity (discussions with friends, conversations, journeys,
with clients)---this can be the leaven that ferments society.

If we bring this to our prayer, we see how the Holy Spirit will place
words on our lips or help us to see opportunities or possibilities that
we can maximize to have that Christian influence.

The work of re-Christianization is similar to the one undertaken by the
early Christians and makes use of the same means---good example in
private and public life, prayer, friendship, nobility, personal
prestige, sharing other people\'s concerns, showing an authentic desire
for their happiness, along with the conviction that there is no peace
for the individual, the family, or society, that is distant from God.

The first Christians found a social environment very distant from the
doctrine that they had so much at heart.

Our Lord has told us that we have to "launch out into the deep" (Luke
5:4), to plant the mustard seeds which can grow into great trees, "where
the birds of the air can come and make nests in their branches" (Matt.
13:32).

Even though they opposed the customs that seemed to be against every
aspect of human dignity, they didn't waste their best energies in
complaining about and denouncing evil.

On the contrary, they chose rather to distribute the treasure they
possessed by spreading it with a joyful and fraternal testimony, serving
society through innumerable initiatives in the area of culture, social
life, education.

St. Josemaría liked to say we have to "drown evil in an abundance of
good" (Josemaría Escrivá, *Furrow*, Point 864). Very often when we\'re
faced with problems, that can be a good idea to think of: How can I
drown the evil in an abundance of good? Instead of focusing on the evil,
focus on the good that we have to do.

They could have spent their lives observing everything that was out of
keeping with an upright life. But if they did that, they might never
have given the true solution to the world at large. The truth is like a
*mustard seed*, but it contains a marvelous power.

You don\'t have to be very clever to see evil, but a deep Christian
spirit is required to discover the presence of God in all circumstances.
We need to keep our eyes open to good, like the true friends of that
paralytic. St. Paul talks precisely about that to the Romans: "to
conquer evil with an abundance of good" (Rom. 12:21).

On many occasions, the Christian\'s task will be to point out whatever
is positive, since things well done encourage us to be better and bring
us closer to God. We need to be quick to notice the virtues of those
around us: a friend\'s generosity, the industriousness of one of our
colleagues, our neighbor\'s readiness to help, our professor\'s
patience.

If at times we can't praise, let us hold our tongues. Sometimes we do a
great good by just being silent. Or we may be able to be of assistance
with a kind correction and our prayer.

We can try to foster whatever good is born around us---sometimes with an
encouraging word, at others with our help given in time and money.

Faced with so much useless or harmful reading, we can spread news about
good books that are being published, and also about magazines that are
not unworthy of a Christian home.

We could write a brief letter expressing our praise and thanks for a
good show, or a sound article, or a good letter in the newspaper. This
takes little effort and is always fruitful.

Our Lord doesn\'t want His children to be naive when faced with life\'s
harsh events. But He asks them never to be bitter or resentful. God
wants us to see whatever is good in people and social events; He
doesn\'t want us to spend the best years of our lives denouncing or
complaining, but rather giving generously from the treasure of our
faith.

A man told me once how a friend of his had died the previous week at the
age of 42 from a heart attack, and said that this friend was always
complaining, always grumbling. He said, "One thing I learned from his
death was not to spend my last breath grumbling."

It\'s very good if we can be remembered as somebody who always had
something positive to say, who lifted up the tone of a conversation, who
encouraged others in the good they were doing.

From giving generously from the treasure of our faith, we can help to
transform people in society and help them not to forget either that
what\'s good is attractive and that it always engenders much more
happiness than lukewarmness does.

A large family, for example, with its many demands and sacrifices,
always brings about more happiness than another family which---out of
pure selfishness---sought its well-being in a little bit more of
material comfort. The joy that other people sense is also a way of
cooperating in the good; at times it is the most fruitful one.

Our Lord has called us to share in His mission to intervene in the lives
of others, so that they learn to be happy on earth and to reach heaven,
for which they have been created.

We\'ve received the command to extend His kingdom, "a kingdom of truth
and life, a kingdom of holiness and grace, a kingdom of justice, love,
and peace," as we\'re told in the Preface of Christ the King.

"We are meant to be Christ," says St. Josemaría, "who passes near those
who live in the world" (J. Escrivá, *Letter*, December 8, 1941).

From Him, we have to learn how we have to serve and help everyone in the
very fabric of society. We need no other title than that of our
Christian vocation in order to spend our lives in the service of others.

The Second Vatican Council says: "The laity derive the right and duty to
the apostolate from their union with Christ the head; incorporated into
Christ\'s Mystical Body through Baptism and strengthened by the power of
the Holy Spirit through Confirmation, they are assigned to the
apostolate by the Lord Himself" (Vatican II, *Apostolicam Actuositatem*,
Point 3).

Our charge and mission come from Christ. We have the right to intervene
in the lives of others, because the life of Christ is shared by all. And
if one member falls ill, or becomes weak, or perhaps dies, the whole
body is affected: Christ suffers, and so also do the healthy members of
His mystical body, since "all men are one in Christ," says St. Augustine
(*Commentary on Psalm 39*).

All of us, so different from one another, are united in Christ, and
charity then becomes part of life. The right to influence other
people\'s lives becomes a joyful duty for every Christian without
exception, no matter how unusual his personal circumstances.

St. Josemaría in *The Forge*, Point 902, said, "Jesus doesn\'t ask our
permission to 'complicate' our lives. He just enters them, and that\'s
that!"

And we who want to be His disciples should do the same with those who
travel along our way. We should make use of the occasions that arise, as
well as creating others ourselves, so as to draw those souls close to
God.

We might suggest a good book for them to read, or give them some advice,
or talk clearly to them about the need to go to Confession, or perhaps
serve them in some other way.

Our Lady went "with haste" to help her cousin (Luke 1:39). She teaches
us always to seek to cooperate in the good, so that Jesus her Son,
through His grace, may continue to work miracles on earth for the good
of all men and women.

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, Saint
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*RK*
