---
layout: homily
title: "Preparing for the Jubilee Year 2025"
---

By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

St. Paul says to the Romans, "Hope does not disappoint" (Rom. 5:5).

This particular phrase is a phrase that Pope Francis has wanted to
choose to help us to focus on the new Jubilee that\'s coming up in the
year 2025.

He\'s chosen the theme of "hope" for this whole Jubilee, and he has
recently issued a document by that very title: "Hope does not
disappoint"--*Spes non confundit* in Latin. It's on the Internet.

He wants hope "to be the central message of the coming Jubilee. ... For
everyone," he says, "may the Jubilee be a moment of genuine, personal
encounter with the Lord Jesus, the 'door' of our salvation, whom the
Church is charged to proclaim always, everywhere, and to all as 'our
hope'" (1 Tim. 1:1).

With that, the Holy Father is quoting St. John, who says, "In truth, I
tell you," using the words of Jesus, "I am the gate of the sheepfold,
the door. I am the gate. ... Anyone who enters through me will be saved.
Such a one will go in and out and will find pasture" (cf. John 10: 7,
9).

In St. Paul to Timothy, he says, "Paul, an apostle of Christ, appointed
by the command of God our Savior, and of Christ Jesus, our hope" (1 Tim
1:1).

The Holy Father has issued this document to help us to prepare
spiritually in our prayer life for this year, which can be a year of
great graces.

He says, "In the heart of each person, hope dwells as the desire and
expectation of good things to come...Even so, uncertainty about the
future may at times give rise to conflicting feelings, ranging from
confident trust to apprehensiveness, from serenity to anxiety, from firm
conviction to hesitation and doubt" (Pope Francis, Bull of Indiction of
the Ordinary Jubilee of the Year 2025, *Spes non confundit,* May 9,
2024).

He says, "For all of us, may the Jubilee be an opportunity to be renewed
in hope. God\'s word helps us find reasons for that hope."

St. Paul to the Romans says, "Since we are justified through faith, we
have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have
obtained access to this grace in which we stand; and we boast in our
hope of sharing in the glory of God. ... Hope does not disappoint,
because God\'s love has been poured into our hearts through the Holy
Spirit who has been given to us" (Rom. 5:1-2, 5).

"In this passage, St. Paul gives us much to reflect upon. We know that
his Letter to the Romans marked a decisive turning point in his work of
evangelization. Until then, he had carried out his activity in the
eastern part of the Empire, but now he turns to Rome and all that Rome
meant in the eyes of the world.

"Before him lay a great challenge, which he took up for the sake of
preaching the Gospel, which knows no barriers or confines.

"The Church of Rome was not founded by Paul, yet he felt impelled to
hasten there in order to bring to everyone the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
crucified and risen from the dead, a message of hope that fulfills the
ancient promises, leads to glory, and, grounded in love, does not
disappoint.

"Hope is born of love and based on the love springing from the pierced
heart of Jesus upon the cross. St. Paul said to the Romans: 'For if
while we were enemies, we were reconciled to God through the death of
his Son, much more surely, having been reconciled, will we be saved by
his life'" (Rom. 5:10). ...

"By his perennial presence in the life of the pilgrim Church, the Holy
Spirit illumines all believers with the light of hope. He keeps that
light burning, like an ever-burning lamp, to sustain and invigorate our
lives.

"Christian hope does not deceive or disappoint because it is grounded in
the certainty that nothing and no one may ever separate us from God\'s
love.

"St. Paul says, 'Who will separate us from the love of Christ? Hardship,
or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or the
sword? ... No, in all these things we are more than conquerors through
him who loved us. For I am convinced that neither death, nor life, nor
angels, nor rulers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers,
nor height, nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able
to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord' (Rom.
8:35, 37-39).

"Here we see the reason why this hope perseveres in the midst of trials:
founded on faith and nurtured by charity, it enables us to press forward
in life."

I was rather struck by somebody who recently told me---just made a
passing comment---that there is no limit to what the Holy Spirit can do
with our words, as we speak them in our home with our children, with our
friends in social interaction, with our colleagues at work, with people
we may meet with chance encounters.

The Holy Spirit can use our words to resound down through the centuries.

"As St. Augustine observes: 'Whatever our state of life, we cannot live
without these three dispositions of the soul, namely, to believe, to
hope, and to love' (St. Augustine, *Sermon 198*).

"St. Paul writes, 'We boast in our sufferings, knowing that suffering
produces endurance., and endurance produces character, and character
produces hope" (Rom. 5:3-4).

"For the Apostle., trials and tribulations mark the lives of those who
preach the Gospel amid incomprehension and persecution (cf. 2 Cor.
6:3-10).

"Yet in those very contexts, beyond the darkness we glimpse a light: we
come to realize that evangelization is sustained by the power flowing
from Christ\'s cross and resurrection."

If we look at the whole history of the Church, which is the history of
the Holy Spirit working in the world, we can see how, "beyond the
darkness," there has been a light, a light that has flowed through all
the apostolic instruments in the Church: in education, in healthcare, in
parishes, in all sorts of places.

"In this way, we learn to practice a virtue closely linked to hope,
namely patience."

I heard a priest in Asia once say that patience is a great social force.
Many things come with time.

Says the Holy Father, "Patience has been put to flight by frenetic
haste, and this has proved detrimental, since it leads us to impatience,
anxiety, and even gratuitous violence, resulting in more unhappiness and
self-centeredness."

This document of the Holy Father gives much room for contemplation, for
that spiritual preparation for that time of spiritual bonanza, which the
Jubilee year of 2025 could be.

"A renewed appreciation of the value of patience," he says, "could only
prove beneficial for ourselves and for others.

"St. Paul often speaks of patience in the context of our need for
perseverance and confident trust in God\'s promises. Yet, before all
else, he testifies to God\'s patience, as 'the God of all patience and
encouragement,' as he says to the Romans (Rom. 15:5).

"Patience, one of the fruits of the Holy Spirit, sustains our hope and
strengthens it as a virtue and a way of life. May we learn to pray
frequently" during this coming year "for the grace of patience, which is
both the daughter of hope and at the same time its firm foundation."

He says, "This interplay of hope and patience makes us see clearly that
the Christian life is a journey calling for moments of greater intensity
to encourage and sustain hope as the constant companion that guides our
steps towards the goal of our encounter with the Lord Jesus."

Pope John Paul II has liked to emphasize how Scripture is full of
nuptials: references to wedding feasts, references to the bridegroom. He
said that marriage is in this world is just a preparation for marriage
in the next. God wants to marry us. We are all called to the eternal
wedding feast.

"Setting out on a journey," says Pope Francis, "is traditionally
associated with our human quest for meaning in life. A pilgrimage on
foot is a great aid for rediscovering the value of silence, effort, and
simplicity of life. ... we learn to treasure the richness of different
experiences and cultures, and are inspired to lift up that beauty, in
prayer, to God, in thanksgiving for his wondrous works. ... where we can
drink from the wellsprings of hope, above all by approaching the
sacrament of Reconciliation, the essential starting-point of any true
journey of conversion."

He says, "Now the time has come for a new Jubilee, when once more the
Holy Door will be flung open to invite everyone to an intense experience
of the love of God that awakens in hearts the sure hope of salvation in
Christ.

"The Holy Year," he says, "will also guide our steps towards yet another
fundamental celebration for all Christians: 2033 will mark the two
thousandth anniversary of the redemption won by the passion, death and
resurrection of the Lord Jesus."

He says, "We are about to make a pilgrimage marked by great events, in
which the grace of God precedes and accompanies his people as they press
forward firm in faith, active in charity, and 'steadfast in hope,'" as
St. Paul says to the Thessalonians (cf. 1 Thess. 1:3).

"We remember," he says, "before our God and Father how active is the
faith, how unsparing the love, how persevering the hope which you have,
from our Lord Jesus Christ," said St. Paul to the Thessalonians (cf. 1
Thess. 1:3).

The Holy Father says, "I hereby decree that the Holy Door of the
Basilica of St. Peter in the Vatican will be opened on the 24th of
December 2024, thus inaugurating the Ordinary Jubilee.

"On the following Sunday, the 29th of December 2024, I will open the
Holy Door of my cathedral, St. John Lateran, which on the 9th of
November this year will celebrate the 1700th anniversary of its
dedication.

"Then, on the 1st of January 2025, the Solemnity of Mary, Mother of God,
the Holy Door of the Papal Basilica of St. Mary Major will be opened.
Finally, on the 5th of January 2025, there will be the opening of the
Holy Door of the Papal Basilica of St. Paul Outside the Walls. These
last three Holy Doors will be closed on Sunday, the 28th of December
2025.

"I further decree," he says, "that on Sunday, the 29th of December 2024,
in every cathedral and co-cathedral, diocesan bishops are to celebrate
Holy Mass as the solemn opening of the Jubilee Year, using the ritual
indications that will be provided for that occasion. ...

"A pilgrimage," he says, "that sets out from a church chosen and then
proceeds to the cathedral can serve to symbolize the journey of hope
that, illumined by the word of God, unites all the faithful.

"In the course of this pilgrimage, passages from the present Document
can be read, along with the announcements of the Jubilee Indulgence to
be gained in accordance with the prescriptions found in the ritual
indications already mentioned."

"May the light of Christian hope," says the Holy Father, "illumine every
man and woman, as a message of God\'s love addressed to all!"

Then the Holy Father proceeds to talk about the signs of hope. He says,
"In addition to finding hope in God\'s grace, we are also called to
discover hope in the signs of the times that the Lord gives us.

"As the Second Vatican Council observed, 'In every age, the Church has
the responsibility of reading the signs of the times and interpreting
them in the light of the Gospel. In this way, in language adopted to
every generation, she can respond to people\'s persistent questions
about the meaning of this present life and of the life to come, and how
one is related to the other' (Vatican II, *Gaudium et spes*, Point 4).

"We need to recognize," says the Holy Father, "the immense goodness
present in our world, lest we be tempted to think ourselves overwhelmed
by evil and violence. The signs of the times, which include the yearning
of human hearts in need of God\'s saving presence, ought to become signs
of hope.

"The first sign of hope should be the desire for peace in our world,
which once more finds itself emerged in the tragedy of war.

"How is it possible that their desperate plea for help is not motivating
world leaders to resolve the numerous regional conflicts in view of
their possible consequences at the global level?

"Is it too much to dream," he questions, "that arms can fall silent and
cease to rain down destruction and death?

"May the Jubilee remind us that those who are peacemakers will be called
children of God," as we're told in the Beatitudes (Matt. 5:9).

"The need for peace challenges us all, and demands that concrete steps
be taken. May diplomacy be tireless," he says, "in its commitment to
seek, with courage and creativity, every opportunity to undertake
negotiations aimed at a lasting peace.

"Looking to the future with hope also entails having enthusiasm for life
and a readiness to share it. Sadly, in many situations this is lacking.

"A first effect of this is the loss of the desire to transmit life. A
number of countries are experiencing," he says, "an alarming decline in
the birth rate as a result of today\'s frenetic pace, fears about the
future, the lack of job security and adequate social policies, and
social models whose agenda is dictated by the quest for profit rather
than concern for relationships.

"In certain quarters, the tendency 'to blame population growth, instead
of extreme and selective consumerism on the part of some, is one way of
refusing to face the real issues' (Pope Francis, Enyclical, *Laudato
si'*, May 24, 2015).

"Openness to life," he says, "and responsible parenthood is the design
that the Creator has implanted in the hearts and bodies of men and
women, a mission that the Lord has entrusted to spouses and to their
love. ... This is a matter of hope: it is born of hope and it generates
hope.

"Consequently, the Christian community should be at the forefront in
pointing out the need for a social covenant to support and foster hope,
one that is inclusive and not ideological, working for a future filled
with the laughter of babies and children, in order to fill the empty
cradles in so many parts of our world.

"All of us, however," he said, "need to recover the joy of living, since
men and women," as we\'re told in Genesis, "were 'created in the image
and likeness of God.'"

"God said, 'Let us make man in our own image, in the likeness of
ourselves, and let them be masters of the fish of the sea, the birds of
heaven, the cattle, all the wild animals, and all the creatures that
creep along the ground'" (Gen. 1:26).

"In every part of the world, believers and their Pastors," he said,
"should be one in demanding dignified conditions for those in prison,
respect for their human rights and above all the abolition of the death
penalty, a provision at odds with Christian faith and one that
eliminates all hope of forgiveness and rehabilitation" (cf. *Catechism
of the Catholic Church*, Point 2267).

And the Holy Father says, "In order to offer prisoners a concrete sign
of closeness, I would myself like to open a Holy Door in a prison, as a
sign inviting prisoners to look to the future with hope and a renewed
sense of confidence. ...

"Signs of hope," says the Holy Father, "are also needed by those who are
the very embodiment of hope, namely, the young. ... Without the hope
that their dreams can come true, they will inevitably grow discouraged
and listless. Escaping into drugs, risk-taking, and the pursuit of
momentary pleasure does greater harm to them in particular, since it
closes them to life\'s beauty and richness, and can lead to depression
and even self-destructive actions. ...

"Signs of hope should also be present for migrants, who leave their
homelands behind in search of a better life for themselves and for their
families. ... A spirit of welcome, which embraces everyone with respect
for his or her dignity, should be accompanied by a sense of
responsibility, lest anyone be denied the right to a dignified
existence. ...

"Echoing the age-old message of the prophets, the Jubilee reminds us
that the goods of the earth are not destined for a privileged few, but
for everyone. The rich must be generous and not avert their eyes from
the faces of their brothers and sisters in need.

"Here I think," says the Holy Father, "especially of those who lack
water and food: hunger is a scandal, an open wound of the body of our
humanity, and it summons all of us to a serious examination of
conscience.

"I renew my appeal that 'with the money spent on weapons and other
military expenditures, let us establish a global fund that can finally
put an end to hunger and favor development in the most impoverished
countries, so that their citizens will not resort to violence or
illusory situations, or have to leave their countries in order to live
in a world in order to seek a more dignified life' (Pope Francis,
Encyclical, *Fratelli tutti*, October 3, 2020).

"Another heartfelt appeal that I would make in light of the coming
Jubilee is directed to the more affluent nations. I ask that they
acknowledge the gravity of so many of their past decisions and determine
to forgive the debts of countries that will never be able to repay them.
More than a question of generosity, this is a matter of justice. ...

"The coming Jubilee Year will also coincide with a significant date for
all Christians, namely, the 1700^th^ anniversary of the celebration of
the first great Ecumenical Council, that of Nicaea. It is worth noting
that from apostolic times, bishops have gathered on various occasions in
order to discuss doctrinal questions and disciplinary matters. ...

"The Council of Nicaea sought to preserve the Church\'s unity, which was
seriously threatened by the denial of the full divinity of Jesus Christ
and hence his consubstantiality with the Father. Some three hundred
bishops took part, convoked at the behest of the Emperor Constantine.
...

"The Council Fathers chose to begin that Creed by using for the first
time the expression 'We believe' (*Nicene Creed*) as a sign that all the
Churches were in communion and that all Christians professed the same
faith.

"The Council of Nicaea was a milestone in the Church\'s history. The
celebration of its anniversary invites Christians to join in a hymn of
praise and thanksgiving to the Blessed Trinity and in particular to
Jesus Christ the Son of God, 'consubstantial with the Father' (*Ibid*.),
who revealed to us that mystery of love.

"At the same time, Nicaea represents a summons to all Churches and
Ecclesial Communities to persevere on the path to visible unity and in
the quest of fitting ways to respond fully to the prayer of Jesus 'that
they may all be one. As you, Father, are in me and I in you,' we\'re
told in St. John, 'may they also be in us so that the world may believe
that you have sent me' (John 17:21).

"Hope finds its supreme witness," says the Holy Father, "in the Mother
of God. In the Blessed Virgin, we see that hope is not a naive optimism
but a gift of grace amid the realities of life.

"Like every mother, when Mary looked at her Son, she thought of his
future. Surely she kept pondering in her heart the words spoken to her
in the Temple by the elderly Simeon: 'This child is destined for the
falling and rising of many in Israel, and to be a sign that will be
opposed, so that the inner thoughts of many will be revealed---and a
sword will pierce your own soul too' (Luke 2:34-35).

"At the foot of the cross, she witnessed the passion and death of Jesus,
her innocent Son. Overwhelmed with grief, she nonetheless renewed her
'Be it done unto me,' never abandoning her hope and trust in God.

"In this way, Mary cooperated for our sake in the fulfilment of all that
her Son had foretold in announcing that he would have to 'undergo great
suffering, and be rejected by the elders, the chief priests, and the
scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again' (Mark 8:31).

"In the travail of that sorrow offered in love, Mary became Our Mother,
the Mother of Hope."

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, Saint
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*MVF*
