---
layout: homily
title: "Father’s Day"
---

By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

"And rising up he came to his father. And when he was yet a great way
off, his father saw him and was moved with compassion, and running to
him, fell upon his neck, and kissed him" (Luke 15:20).

While he was yet a long way off, the father was looking out every day to
see if his son was going to come back that particular day, and then he
saw him a long way off.

The picture that we get in Scripture of fatherhood is very rich, very
warm, very beautiful. On this Fathers' Day, we have an opportunity to
look at our role as a father and see the great vocation that God has
given to us.

It\'s said that a good mother loves to see her children getting on well
with their father. The family is the only institution where we learn
life\'s most sacred lesson: unselfish love.

And while the child learns an awful lot about love from his mother, in
many ways the father has to be a model of that unselfish love.

Pope Saint John Paul has written some beautiful things about the family.
He talks about the family as "a school of deeper humanity" (John Paul
II, Apostolic Exhortation, *Familiaris Consortio*, November 22, 1981 and
Vatican II, *Gaudium et spes*, December 7, 1965).

All these words of John Paul II about what the family has to be, you can
say, have to be embodied in the father figure.

We\'re building "the civilization of love." He says the family is "the
sanctuary of life" (John Paul II, *Letter to Families*, February 2,
1994). We\'re building "the culture of life" (John Paul II, Encyclical,
*Evangelium Vitae*, March 25, 1995).

The family is a school of love, a school of virtue, a school of the
soul.

The word "school" contains many meanings. The Second Vatican Council
likes to say that the primary educators are parents (Vatican II,
*Gravissimum educationis*, October 28, 1965).

The first school is the family. In the primary and secondary schools
that the child goes to, they just put the icing on the cake, but the
cake is baked at home.

Therefore, in a special way, the father figure has to be a teacher in
that school---a teacher with his words, but most of all, with his
example, with his life.

John Paul II liked to say that "the future of humanity passes through
the family" (John Paul II, Apostolic Exhortation, *Familiaris
consortio*, November 22, 1981).

One speaker at a conference I heard recently said, "Only Christianity is
capable of changing the hearts of men. NGOs can\'t, governments can\'t."

Father figures have a very powerful mission and weapon to be able to
change the hearts of men, give children something great to think about,
help them to live by great ideals, help them to see that ultimately,
we\'re all called to the eternal wedding feast.

Fathers have to form souls and shape souls. Our vocation and mission as
a father develops first of all in a family environment. Our "first
apostolate is the home" (Josemaría Escrivá, *Letter*, January 9, 1959).

There was a man in Ireland many years ago who used to attend
recollections of Opus Dei. He was a very prestigious actuary. Later he
ran for public office. Very influential.

One of the things he learned from these recollections was that his
family was very important.

He had eight children, but he always said he thought that the most
important thing in his life was his work. But through formation, he
began to see that his family was as important and more important than
his work.

He began to organize his family like he organized his office. He
installed a filing cabinet at home, opened a file for each one of his
children, had regular meetings with his wife to discuss yearly goals,
quarterly goals, weekly goals, and he had a reporting session with each
one of his children once a week or once every two weeks.

He took his family life seriously and it took on a whole new meaning for
him.

We have to try and create the atmosphere of a home. Be very professional
in organizing our home because so many wonderful things have to come
from the formation that we give our children. We\'re building the
future.

Our Lord wants us to have a generous cooperation in the plans of God, to
sacrifice our likes and dislikes, to be affectionate, because everybody
has a heart, everybody needs affection, encouragement, kindness.

I heard a priest in Asia many years ago saying that young people today
can be faced with great pessimism. It\'s good to be aware of that.

In their studies, in life, in finances, you have to lift them up; give
them something great to live for.

As fathers, we have to be easy to live with, good communicators who know
our children because we spend time with them.

St. Josemaría used to say that parents have to try and be good friends
of their children (Josemaría Escrivá, *Conversations*, Point 100). It\'s
a very easy thing to say but not such an easy thing to achieve.

I taught in another country one time and there was one particular fellow
who was of average intelligence, but his performance was much higher
than you would have expected.

He was an only son. The father had three daughters, and he was a very
successful businessman; a busy man but he had a special time for his
son. Of all the fathers that I knew, I think he was the one that most
managed to be a friend to his son.

Once, I asked him, "How do you manage this?"

He said, "I gave up the cocktail circuit a couple of years ago. I try to
be home by six in the evening. I try to spend an hour with my son each
day. We\'re buddy buddies; I know what\'s going on in his life. We talk
about all sorts of things."

Then I asked him, "What gave you that motivation?"

He said, "I spent a couple of years working in Wall Street and I got to
know a Jewish man there who was very successful. He was on the up and
up. One time he invited me home to his house in upstate New York.

"It took us five minutes to get from the gate to the house, and that\'s
not because the car was breaking down; it was an enormous mansion.

"Then he showed me around the house room by room---a beautiful place,
beautifully set up---and then we came to his bedroom. Above his bed,
there was a big sign that said, 'The greatest failure of a man is to
fail as a father.'"

He said, "I was a bit surprised; he was this super-successful man on
Wall Street, with a notice about failure hanging above his bed. I asked
him, 'What\'s this all about?'

"He said, 'When I was on the up and up in Wall Street, I put my kids
into boarding schools, and Christmas time came and I was very busy, so I
just left them there. Summertime came and I was also very caught up, so
I left them there also, and a couple of years went by.

'Now one of my sons is on drugs and the other one is something else, and
the third one is something else.' He painted a very dismal picture."

This man told me, "I came home to my own country, and I put a sign over
my own bed to remind myself every day."

When you meet fathers who\'ve made big mistakes with their children,
they might be very successful in life in all sorts of other ways, but
they can have pain in their hearts because of those mistakes. There are
certain things we can\'t afford to get wrong.

We can ask Our Lord in our prayer that we might grow to be the good
father that He wants us to be. We need ongoing formation. We need to be
reminded of these points, reminded of what it\'s all about, what I\'m
here for.

We need to learn how to grow in all the virtues because the father
figure in the home has to be a model of virtue, of justice, of order,
punctuality, of cheerfulness, of kindness.

The greatest thing a man can do for his family is to love his wife very
much. The children learn love when they see it in the home; they catch
it by osmosis.

That means we have to know the words and the gestures that only those
who love know are important.

We have to be there at special times: family times, birthdays,
anniversaries, special family moments. We can\'t afford to miss those
things.

There might be something special that our wife asks for or the children
might ask for. It might not seem to be very important, but the very fact
that they\'re asking for it, asking for our presence, is already a
compliment.

It\'s already a signal that this is something important. Perhaps we have
to stop what we\'re doing and live that family priority. Family values
mean family priorities.

We have to be there at special moments. If your sons and daughters see
that you come to their football matches or their hockey matches or their
volleyball matches, you support them in their sports, in their
interests, in their pastimes---you build bridges.

Maybe you go to the trouble of checking their homework each night or a
few nights a week. That can also be very encouraging for them, because
that\'s their work.

You look at their work, you compliment them on it, you encourage them,
and maybe you help them to improve. But they see that you see that their
work is something valuable and important. It communicates a special
message.

We have to know how to communicate in the home. A father once said to
his wife, "Why do you let our son talk to you like that?"

The mother answered, "Because that\'s the way you talk to me." Our words
can be like arrows. We have to be careful with those words.

Love is expressed through details, through thoughtfulness, through being
proactive.

St. Josemaría used to say couples have to keep their love young and
fresh after many years of marriage, as it was before you got married
(cf. J. Escrivá, *Christ Is Passing By*, Point 26).

There are times when you\'ve got to sweep your wife off her feet, keep
dating her, keep attentive to the small things that send great messages.
Mother Teresa says, "A few kind words may be very short, but their
echoes are endless."

I was with a couple last week and just in an odd moment, the husband had
to say to the wife, "How long have we been married?" And she said, "Four
and a half years."

And he spontaneously said, "It seems like four months." I think she\'ll
remember that for the rest of her life.

There are always misunderstandings, miscommunications, as there are when
there are any two people present. The devil tries to break up unity in a
family.

You\'ve got to be aware of that, smoothen things out, be an instrument
of unity. Manners are important, table manners, "Please" and "Thank you"
and "I\'m sorry" because they express charity.

The best times in our life have to be at home and with our family, not
out with the boys or with other people.

We may have to socialize from time to time, there may be certain
obligations, but always be glad to get home and at a reasonable time.

Our families, which are the domestic Church---beautiful phrase, the
domestic Church---all the values and beliefs that come from the Church
have to find their way into the home and be expressed there in the
atmosphere, in concrete things.

Our families become centers that radiate the Gospel message. They\'re an
oasis for other families and marriages, a great heritage to society and
to the Church, and apostolic schools.

Family always has to come first. This is the apostolate within the
family. Our Lord gave great dignity to family life.

We should be careful of wishing things were different. 'Oh, if only it
wasn\'t like this.' 'Oh, if only something else.'

This is the family that God has given to me. This is where He wants me
to be with these particular problems or these financial difficulties or
these illnesses or this or that or these little problems.

This is where God wants me to be holy through my self-giving, through
giving importance to my family life, dedicating myself to it. No matter
what the circumstances may be, this is where I am called to be holy.

Even if everything might turn out to be the complete opposite of what it
should be, or even a bit of a disaster, I\'m still called to be holy
here.

To be more effective as a father, like all good managers, I have to ask
myself: What can I contribute in this situation?

We need a great sense of responsibility, initiative, patience in
bringing up children. They are the treasure that the Lord has placed in
my hands. They are the primary mission of my life in this world.

My silent service and faithfulness take on great meaning. This is the
will of God for me.

I need to be very focused. I need to learn how to forget myself, to be a
pillar of family life, at times humble, full of faith, trusting, a just
man, manly, available, full of fortitude, because I have to rear great
human beings.

That means that I have to live like a great human being, to bring up my
children to be a good son-in-law or a good daughter-in-law, to have that
edge, to go the extra mile.

I have to live a spirit of service in the home, so I give example. I
teach my children that anything that the household helper manager might
do, I am willing to do.

I sweep the floor occasionally. I wash the dishes. I wash clothes. I
paint a wall. I wash the car. Sweep the driveway. I do whatever is
necessary. No jobs are beneath me.

When we lead through virtue, and we\'re called to be leaders, the
leadership of the family is very important, then we get followers. We
get joiners.

We prepare our children for their marriage and to help them to solve
their problems when they come to those situations.

If we look at our marriage or family life at the moment, we might see
things that we need to change or improve. This is the benefit of ongoing
formation. We get to be reminded of things. We see where more input is
needed.

If you were to ask what is the theme song of your fatherhood vocation at
the moment, could it be *Where Have All the Flowers Gone*? Long time
passing.

"Once upon a time, I was falling in love and now I\'m only falling
apart." The *Eclipse of the* *Heart* has taken place. "Once upon a time,
there was light in my life."

Our vocation is a dynamic thing. There\'s always a new call to start
again. We have to create a whole new revolution in society about this,
to help many other fathers to fulfill their role.

It\'s said that a dead father is better than an absent father, because
at least a dead father, you know where he is.

We could thank God for our family vocation. A father once told me---a
doctor in London who had eight children and was rushing to the
beatification of St. Josemaría in Rome in 1992, and he was bringing two
of the smallest children with him. He was a bit late finishing his
practice. They had to run for the plane. They were rushing all the way.

He was carrying one baby in one arm and another, maybe three years old,
by the hand of his wife. They had to rush the plane. They got on. They
just got their seats, and they sat down with a big sigh of relief.

A man leaned over across the aisle and said to him, "I can see that you
are a great father."

The guy was flabbergasted. He said, "That was one of the proudest
moments of my life, for a stranger to tell me, 'I can see you are a
great father.'"

What a beautiful thing to say to people. Fathers also need
encouragement, especially when they\'re running for planes with a couple
of kids hanging out of them.

We have to try and see what we can do to help fathers, just like we try
to help mothers. Help fathers to be better, to encourage them. Expose
them to good ideas.

St. Josemaría says in *The Forge*, "And I also tell them: you Christian
mothers and fathers are a great spiritual motor, sending the strength of
God to your own ones, strength for that struggle, strength to win,
strength to be saints. Don\'t let them down!" (J. Escrivá, *The Forge*,
Point 692). We fill our children with strength.

The father also has to be a man of prayer. Children have to see you
praying. Sunday Mass is not negotiable.

We leave a legacy in our spiritual life. We try to accompany each family
member, first and foremost with prayer, helping them to improve, helping
them to see that they have to have a positive influence in their
environment.

We practice the corporal and spiritual works of mercy. We bring them to
visit poor families or the elderly or the lonely.

We go through their wardrobes and drawers occasionally, and see the
things they don\'t need and accompany them to spread those good material
things that God has given to us to other people. That\'s why we teach
them to be generous, to have a social conscience.

We instill great virtues in them: virtues of giving, of generosity. They
come to be people who know what their souls are worth. They give until
it hurts.

If ever God calls a child in your family to be a member of a
supernatural family in the Church, we see this as the greatest grace and
honor that God could give to us.

That way, we practice the school of virtue. We don\'t allow any
bourgeois lifestyle, any pagan lifestyle. Children have jobs in the
home. We follow them up that they make their bed, that they keep their
room tidy, that they do their homework, they take care of their friends.

We\'re sensitive to indulgence or excessive comfort, and we live that
principle in our own life also: a temperance, an order.

We are examples of heroic Christian witness in faith, and detachment,
and humility, in difficult economic situations, when the extra child
comes or there are problems within the family.

Fathers realize that I am "the work of art that God wants to produce"
(cf. Eph. 2:10), that my children see that work of art and want to
imitate it. We show them the way to Christ.

Sometimes you just take a step back, be humble, let your wife shine, "be
silent and disappear" (J. Escrivá, *Letter*, January 28, 1975).

Appreciate, with those simple words, that show your spouse that you
appreciate all the little things that she\'s doing for your home, for
your family, for your children.

Very often the sanctification of our family life is full of little
things, little duties, little acts of love or encouragement or words or
affection, little deeds of forgiveness, of patience, of unity.

A father told me when I asked him, "How is your family?" He says, "I\'ve
become the driver. I drive my children to their sports occasions and to
their parties. I find my weekends are filled up with driving them here
and there, but I use the driving time to talk to my children."

There was a great father. He wasn\'t a wealthy man, but he was a great
father.

If we think and plan family gatherings, get-togethers, mealtimes, feast
days, Christmas, the father has to be thinking about family fun so that
our children enjoy family life. They also see that 'my family is the
best place to be.'

If you find that they bring many of their friends to your home, that\'s
a good sign. It\'s not a problem.

We have to try and be a dynamo in family life, be there for people,
create that "bright and cheerful home" (J. Escriva, *Christ Is Passing
By*, Point 78), and realize that everyone has a heart.

That means sometimes we have to sacrifice our likes and dislikes. We
might not get to watch our favorite football match.

Our heart has to be on the ground. Our Lord talks about the "grain of
wheat that falls into the ground and dies" (John 12:24). We\'re a family
man, 24-7.

We live *unity of life*. No matter what our friends or colleagues may be
doing or where they\'re going, we are family men.

There was a group of travel agents once that was being taken out of
Buenos Aires to some island that they were going to review as a resort.

The plane took off full of these travel agents. Somebody got on the
microphone and said, "We're going to have the weekend of our lives.
We\'re going to have a great time. This island is going to be
fantastic." He began to paint a picture that was not very savory.

There was a man there, the sort of person that would be listening to
meditations like this, who realized that this perhaps wasn\'t the
greatest thing to be hearing, the tone that this guy was having, the
atmosphere he was creating for the weekend.

When he finished, he went and took the microphone. He said, "Fine,
let\'s have a great time. But let\'s just remember that twenty minutes
ago at the airport, we left our wives and our children. Let\'s not do
anything this weekend that might disappoint them."

With those few words, he changed the whole atmosphere that had been
created.

As family men and fathers of families, we have to lift up the tone of
the environment, spiritualize it, bring a lot of common sense there.

We have to remind our children to take care of the extended family, to
think of their grandparents, to call them, to bring them there to meet
them regularly.

Or maybe to bring them also to cemeteries, where grandparents or
great-grandparents are buried---a very good reminder to them that one
day that\'s where they\'re going to be.

Golden words in the family are "Thank you," "I\'m sorry," "Can I do
anything for you?"

Father have to try and be on top of the material details of the house,
keep things in good condition---serving without it being noticed,
without keeping the score, without reminding people of 'how hard I work,
how little I complain; ;ook at all the great things I\'ve done for you.'

We're told in *The Forge*, "You should be full of wonder at the goodness
of Our Father God. Are you not filled with joy to know that your home,
your family, your country, which you love so much, are the raw material
which you must sanctify?" (J. Escrivá, *The Forge*, Point 689).

Fathers sometimes can have broken hearts. I heard of a father recently,
a young man in his late 30s, who had a five-year-old son and a
four-month-old daughter, and his wife passed away last week from
leukemia. Here he is at the start of his life with a broken heart.

But whenever we find broken hearts or experience them ourselves, Fulton
Sheen says it\'s because God wants to enter into it a little more.
"God\'s ways are not our ways" (cf. Isa. 55:8).

When we come across these situations or experience them ourselves, it\'s
because God has some great apostolic plan in mind for us that we don\'t
understand.

But when the years pass, it becomes clearer---the mysteries of life. We
can try and live a great faith in those moments, great hope.

This is when the sacraments can help us very much, to help us to have
that strong faith and strong hope, and to see, 'This is part of my
calling to holiness.'

We can ask Our Lord to help us to look a little deeper at this vocation
to be a father, to see how we can live it better.

Christ showed the depth of His love through service. "He was humble,
yes, even to accepting death, death on a cross" (Phil. 2:8).

We could ask Our Lord for the grace to understand the mystery of love a
little better. "God is love" (1 John 4:8,16).

The primary role that we have to fulfill is to show love in the family.
There\'s a song that says, "Love in your heart was not put there to
stay. Love is not love until you give it away" (Oscar Hammerstein II).

Love is wanting life\'s best for others, even if it doesn\'t include us.

We can look at the ways in which we can grow in this area. Ask Our Lord
for the grace to have the concern of a good shepherd.

St. John of the Cross says to be prepared "to lose always and see all
others win is a trait of valiant souls." One of the qualities of such
souls is that they will "give rather than receive, even till they come
to give themselves."

And why we serve in the family? Service alone is not enough. No husband
or wife just wants service; they want love. We serve with refinement.

Often, the most valuable gift we can give our children is good
example---a good example of being a good citizen, a good member of
society, a good parishioner, a good participator in community events and
school functions.

We learn from Our Lady many great things, how to build a family.

She wanted the best for her friends. "They have no wine" (John 2:3). Our
Lord is moved to work that miracle (John 2:4-10).

Our Lady went to serve Elizabeth for three months (Luke 1:39-56), a
serious contribution of friendship.

The little duties of family life or social life may be pathways that
seem very ordinary, simple, but which we have to make divine through
love.

"Happiness doesn\'t come from doing things that are easy" (cf. J.
Escrivá, *Furrow*, Point 795). Often it comes from carrying the cross.

On this Father\'s Day, we can ask Our Lady that she might help us to go
a little bit deeper in this calling that we\'ve been given, to take it
more seriously all the time, so that we learn how to be a better father,
a better family man, and that we bring enormous joy to all the people
that God has placed around us.

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, Saint
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*EW*
