---
layout: homily
title: "Generosity"
---


By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

There was a kid in Manila one time who used to sell cigarettes at a
street corner. He was very young, and he didn\'t know how to manage his
money.

There was a parish church run by the Salesian Fathers nearby, Don Bosco
Church, so he gave his money to one of the priests there to manage for
him.

Every day he would come and he would bring his 20 shillings or whatever
he got from selling his cigarettes, and later in the day he would come
and ask for 10 shillings to buy some rice.

One day he came and asked for 60 shillings, and that was about
everything that he had saved up.

So the priest was a bit surprised, and asked him, why did he want 60
shillings? Normally he asks for much less.

And he said, 'You see there\'s a lady who\'s given birth to a baby under
the bridge, and she has no milk for the baby, and milk costs 60
shillings a can. And so I thought I would buy some milk for the baby.'

The priest was very moved. Here was this guy who had nothing in this
world, an eight-year-old kid, an orphan, who had a pair of slippers, a
pair of shorts, and a T-shirt.

He managed just to save up what for him was a small fortune, but then at
the first sight of someone in need, he was willing to spend all of that.

The priest made his homily the following Sunday at all the Masses out of
this story, and there was a rich lady in the congregation, and she
offered to pay for this kid\'s education.

How happy God must be when He sees a soul like that shining up at Him,
totally detached from everything, completely generous.

This meditation is about generosity, a very beautiful virtue, something
that Our Lord talks a lot about in Scripture, which He admires in a
special way. He loves a cheerful, generous heart (*cf*. 2 Cor. 9:7).

"There was a rich man who used to clothe himself in purple and fine
linen and who feasted every day in splendid fashion. And there was a
poor man, a certain poor man named Lazarus, who lay at his gate covered
with sores, and longing to be filled with the crumbs that fell from the
rich man\'s table. Even the dogs came and licked his sores" (Luke
16:19-21).

Scripture is full of comparisons, sometimes very graphic comparisons.

When we read this story, we tend usually to think in terms of material
things, the rich man had so many things, clothed himself in purple and
fine linen, feasted every day in splendid fashion. And then you have
this tremendous contrast in Lazarus, full of sores, and the dogs. It\'s
the epitome of misery. He has nothing.

But if we look at this parable in relation to spiritual things, a rich
man full of spiritual things, and Lazarus maybe nothing spiritual, it
can have a lot more meaning for us, because God has given us many
spiritual things: all our formation, our education, our interior life,
ideas, spiritual reading, so many things in the course of our life that
He\'s filled us with.

We\'re spiritual millionaires. It sort of puts the onus on us then to
think about how we can spread that wealth around the place, because we
truly have tremendous spiritual wealth.

The reality is that there may be many "Lazari" at our gate who have
nothing, and yet we have so many things.

There\'s a phrase in the Old Testament, I think it\'s the Psalms, that
says, *Quid retribuam Domino pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi?* "What
shall I give back to God for all that he has given to me?" (Ps. 115:3).

It\'s not a bad phrase to repeat occasionally. And it comes in the form
of a question that challenges us. What shall I give? What shall I give
back to God for all that He has given to me?

When we look at the course of our life, we see so many things that God
has given to us that He hasn\'t given to other people.

"Those to whom much has been given, much will be required" (Luke 12:48).

Again, we don\'t have to think of the material things, but the spiritual
things, and also, all the other talents, our sight, our hearing, our
limbs. So many things that God has given to us.

It moves us to continually ask, What can I give back to God? What can I
contribute?

Peter Drucker in *The Effective Executive* talks a lot about how to be
more effective. He says the key to being more effective is to ask the
right question, which is: What can I contribute?

In this committee meeting, in this class, in this profession, in this
get-together, in this family gathering, with this particular soul
that\'s here in front of me, or these friends that are connections or
acquaintances that are around me---what can I contribute?

It\'s a good question to ask in relation to our generosity with all the
spiritual things that God has given to us.

At each stage of our life, we have greater opportunities to be more
generous, because God has given us more things: more abilities, more
ideas, more acumen, more experience.

It may be that our generosity will come with an idea, an idea that can
change the lives of many people, or even one person---something that we
share, or something that we have derived from years of professional
work, or so many other things.

God wants our generosity, and particularly, our generosity in
corresponding to the graces that He\'s given to us. Because He\'s given
us so many things, He\'s given us also graces to outdo ourselves in all
sorts of ways, in situations, and with people that he\'s placed around
us.

"He sat down opposite the treasury and watched the people putting money
into the treasury. Many of the rich put in a great deal. A poor widow
came and put in two small coins, the equivalent of a penny" (Mark
12:41-42).

We know that Our Lord was so happy with that generous heart; moved Him
so completely.

Because we may have little to give, it doesn\'t mean that God doesn\'t
want us to give. He still wants us to give, and to give with our whole
heart, with a great spirit.

We can\'t hide behind the fact that 'I don\'t seem to have five talents'
or, 'I may have three or only one' (Matt. 25:14-23).

We all have something to give, and God wants us to give it in a very
generous way.

"Sell your possessions," we\'re told in St. Luke, "and give to those in
need. Get yourselves purses that do not wear out, treasure that will not
fail you in heaven, where no thief can reach it and no moth destroy it.
For wherever your treasure is, there your heart will be too" (Luke
12:33-34).

Our Lord talks a lot about treasures in Scripture: a man who found "the
pearl of great price" ...he "found a treasure" (Matt. 13:44-46).
Something that was really worth having. Something that gave him great
joy and pride.

One of the treasures that God has placed in our treasury is the ability
to give, to know what generosity means, and hopefully to teach that to
other people, with our words and with our example.

Something very beautiful, it moves the heart. When you see somebody who
really knows how to be generous, it\'s quite something. This person is
serious. It\'s like a statement of authenticity. They\'re really trying
to be holy; they\'re really living the virtues.

The danger is that our treasure could be in other things.

I was called one night to a patient in a private hospital beside where
we worked. That patient was going to die that night.

He was a man in his 50s. He had cancer. Normally we weren\'t called over
there; it was the domain of the consultants.

But that night I was on duty and got called over. When I went into the
room, the family was there, and he asked them to leave.

Then he took hold of my wrist. His hand was already cold and clammy. He
was going to die that night, and with a look of terror in his eyes, he
said, "Doctor, don\'t let me die."

Suddenly, what came into my mind was a phrase of Scripture about our
treasure being in this world: "Do not store up for yourselves treasures
on earth, where dust and moths consume, and thieves break in and steal"
(Matt. 6:19).

This man was at the hour of his death and he was realizing that all his
treasures were in this world. He was well-to-do and he was in the best
hospital in the country.

But it was as though he had no treasures built up for himself in heaven.

We have to try and use our time well, in order to be generous with what
we have.

What can I do, what can I contribute, how can I do more, how can I give
more?

At each stage of our life, there may be ways in which God wants us to
give in different ways with different people in the places around us; or
perhaps, with some new initiative or a new idea, passing on experiences
or information or a whole pile of other things.

But we know that He wants us to give, and to give generously, with
whatever He has given to us.

"Go, sell all that you have, give to the poor, and then come, follow me"
(Matt. 19:21). It\'s an astonishing challenge.

But it\'s that astonishing challenge that Our Lord places in front of
all of us. Go and detach yourself and give, and give in all sorts of
ways, and give in ways that you perhaps never imagined.

From having that correspondence to the graces that God gives us, then
hopefully, we can demand that same generosity from others. They too
might be willing to correspond in superlative ways that God is asking of
them.

"I urge you then, brothers," says St. Paul, "remembering the mercies of
God, to offer your bodies as a living sacrifice, dedicated and
acceptable to God. That is the kind of worship for you, a sensible
people" (Rom. 12:1).

There may be times when we have to be generous in offering little aches
and pains, or contradictions, or challenges, or changes of plans, or all
sorts of other things that may come our way; jobs that are asked of us,
or assignments, things given to us by our boss.

Possibly, things that we don\'t particularly like; we\'d much prefer to
be doing something else at this particular moment.

Or some other emergency comes up and we're needed some place; we have to
drop what we are doing.

All the little sacrifices that God may ask of us, and He wants us to try
and see the loving hand of Our Father God in all those things, so that
we generously give back to God our time, our energy, our plans.

"He got into one of the boats, which was Simon\'s, and asked him to put
out a little from the shore. And he sat down and taught the crowds from
the boat" (Luke 5:3).

We know that initially, like with Simon, Our Lord asked for a little.
Not too many complications. Little things here and there.

But then there came another moment when Our Lord asked for everything:
out into the deep water. That\'s where He wants you, with the wind
blowing in your face, because that\'s where the big fish are (Luke
5:4-6).

Big things. He wants you to risk everything, even though you don\'t know
how to swim.

Our Lord gives a lot, but He asks a lot.

There was a monk once who was walking along the street and he saw a
beggar. He put a jewel into the cap of the beggar.

The first reaction of the beggar was to think, This must be a fake.
Nobody would give me a jewel.

But he said, I can go and get it valued. I might get the price of a meal
out of it.

He went along and he had it valued in some pawn shop someplace, but he
found it was worth \$50,000.

He walked around in a dream for a few hours and days, thinking of all
the wonderful things he was going to do with that \$50,000. He\'d never
be hungry again, he could have a roof over his head, he could have fine
clothes.

Now when he came back to earth, he began to wonder, Why did the monk
give me this jewel? He must have known that it was worth something. This
began to bother him.

Then he came to the conclusion that "if the monk gave me this jewel, it
was because he has something more valuable than the jewel." This began
to bother him a little more.

He began to realize, "If the monk has something more valuable than the
jewel, that\'s something that\'s really worth having, because that\'s of
greater value than the jewel."

He decided to go and look for the monk and find him, and eventually, he
did. He said to him, "Look, I realize you have something more valuable
than the jewel. You have that thing that made you give it to me. I tell
you what, I will give you back the jewel if you will give it to me, that
thing that made you give it to me."

Of course, he was talking about the virtue of generosity, a wonderful
treasure to build up and grow in.

We\'ve all given something in our life. We've tried to give ourselves
completely. But God wants us to maintain and foster that generosity.

It\'s not just a once-in-a-lifetime thing; something, like all the
virtues, that has to grow.

"It\'s worth the effort to give ourselves totally," said St. Josemaría,
"to correspond to the love and confidence that God has given us"
(Josemaría Escrivá, *Christ Is Passing By*, Point 129).

Our Lord gave Himself totally for us on the Cross, in the Blessed
Eucharist, in all sorts of ways. He invites us to be generous with our
time, with our energy, with our efforts, with our charity, with material
things; but also with our understanding, with our patience, with our
apostolate.

How can I break new ground? How can I meet new people? How can I have a
greater influence? How can I be in touch with the neuralgic people in
society and leave a mark and a legacy there, or spend more time with
them?

It\'s a virtue of great souls who find their reward in the act of
giving. A generous person knows how to give without demanding.

Giving enlarges the heart and helps us become a greater person, a
greater soul. It leads us to forget the little irritations of daily life
and know how to smile.

We\'re told in *The Forge*, "Lord, may your children be like red-hot
coals, but without flames to be seen from afar. Let them be burning
embers that will set alight each heart they come into contact with.
