---
layout: homily
title: "Do Not Let Your Hearts Be Troubled"
---

By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

**Do not let your hearts be troubled; believe in God, believe also in
me** (John 14:1).

The peace that must inhabit our hearts is a gift from God. It requires
some effort on our part, and that may need some work to accomplish it.
But that peace is a gift to be welcomed; a grace to request and to
receive.

Only God can truly communicate peace to us---our human efforts are
insufficient.

It is good to meditate on the Scriptural texts that speak to us about
peace as a gift from God. The most significant passages can be found in
St. John\'s Gospel.

After having washed the feet of His disciples, Our Lord spoke to them
for a long time during this last meal that He shared with them. He
leaves them with a spiritual testament before entering into His Passion.

At the beginning of Chapter 14 of John's Gospel, we find the words, **Do
not let your hearts be troubled**. The disciples are upset and worried
because of everything that\'s going on in Jerusalem as the hostility
against Our Lord was getting stronger and stronger.

The first thing that Our Lord asks of them is to calm down. They must
not let themselves get upset, and they need to keep an attitude of
faith.

Our Lord asks this of them so that they can hear all the important
things that He has to say to them.

An upset heart is often incapable of hearing God\'s Word, while a
peaceable heart can allow it to penetrate deeply.

A little later, Our Lord speaks to them about the coming of the Holy
Spirit. He gives them a magnificent promise: **Peace I leave with you;
my peace I give to you. Not as the world gives do I give to you** (John
14:27).

Our Lord is soon going to leave His disciples, but He promises them the
grace of the Holy Spirit, and He leaves them this precious gift of
peace.

The peace that Jesus promises is not the peace of this world. It\'s not
the tranquility of everything going well; of problems resolved and
desires satisfied, which would be a fairly rare peace.

The peace that Our Lord promises is a peace that can be experienced even
in difficult and uncertain situations because it has its source and
foundation in God.

A little while later, at the conclusion of His long discourse at the
Last Supper, His last words invoke the theme of peace again: **I have
said these to you, that in me you may have peace. In the world, you will
have tribulation.** **But be of good cheer; I have overcome the world**
(John 16:33).

It's as though the ultimate goal of all these words that Jesus tells His
disciples is to establish them in peace. You have to find peace in the
certainty of Christ\'s victory over all the evil forces that upset the
world. **Be of good cheer; I have overcome the world.**

At the same time, Our Lord shows us what the secret of our peace is. The
true source of peace is Our Lord Himself. We can try to listen to His
words that He says to us, and put faith, trust, prayer, and love there,
which allows us to welcome God\'s peace into our hearts. The more
peaceful I am, the more God acts.

The search for interior peace is more than just acquiring it for
psychological tranquility. It is something much more profound: it\'s
about opening ourselves to God\'s action.

I saw an advertisement for a new block of flats that had gone up
recently. The advertisement was very well phrased in a beautiful place
on a big billboard.

But one phrase there caught my eye. It says, "This block of flats, this
future home for you, is nestled in idyllic tranquility."

We might have a beautiful home. It might be "nestled in idyllic
tranquility." But we might not have peace in our hearts.

One very simple truth that is of great spiritual significance is, 'The
more we tend towards peace, the more the grace of God can act in our
lives.'

St. Seraphim of Sarov has said: *Acquire the spirit of peace and a
thousand souls around you will be saved.*

Like a peaceful lake perfectly reflects the sun, so a peaceful spirit is
receptive to the action and the movements of the Holy Spirit.

Another writer says that the devil does his utmost to banish peace from
one\'s heart because he knows that God abides in peace and it is in
peace that God accomplishes great things. Very often, lack of peace or
disunity or lack of harmony can be a result of the devil.

St. Francis de Sales says, *Because love can only reside in peace,
always be careful to keep the holy tranquility of heart that I so often
recommend to you*.

Fighting. to keep our peace---fighting against worry, anxieties, or
agitations---are indispensable conditions for letting God act, in that
way allowing us to grow in love and give our lives over to the
fruitfulness to which we are called.

There may be certain things in life that can affect our nerve chemistry
that might rob us of a certain peace, and we have to use all the medical
means that are available to restore that.

But the peace we are speaking about here is deeper in our hearts, which
can be there in spite of any external, natural agitation that might be
present.

When we are not at peace---when we are filled with all sorts of
anxieties---we can be at the mercy of our emotions, and we don\'t have
an objective or accurate outlook on life. We can be tempted to see
everything darkly and to doubt everything in our lives.

But when we are at peace, we see clearly.

St. Ignatius of Loyola distinguishes periods of *consolation and
desolation* in the spiritual life. He suggests not to make decisions
concerning our life during the latter, when we are going through
troubled times. We should simply remain faithful to what we decided
during the last period of peace, and we should wait for peace to come
back again, before making any life-changing decision.

When a problem comes up that can make us lose our peace, the urgency is
not in resolving the problem in the hope of regaining peace.

The urgency is in first recovering some minimum amount of peace, and
then seeing what we can do with the problem. In that way, we avoid
making hasty or precipitous choices governed by fear, and we avoid
trying to resolve problems out of our power at any cost.

How can we recover that minimum of peace?

Essentially, by trusting in God: with fervent prayer, making acts of
faith and of hope, and recalling the words of Scripture that invite us
to a greater trust. **Do not let your hearts be troubled** (John 14:1).

One place for peace is in prayer. One fundamental way of acquiring
interior peace is faithfulness to our plan of prayer. Sometimes we lack
peace because we don\'t pray sufficiently.

Our peace doesn\'t find its source simply in human realities. It finds
its source in God. And that\'s where we have to look for it.

It\'s logical that the more we are in communication with God, the more
we find peace. One writer says *every day in prayer, God gives us an
all-new peace*.

This is a beautiful reality. In God, there is an energy and a fantastic
life, but there is also a profound peace. St. Paul speaks of God as "the
God of peace" (Phil. 4:9).

God is an abyss of peace; an ocean of peace. Each time that we are in
real contact with Him, some of this divine peace descends into our
hearts.

We have all had this experience from time to time. We might be very
anxious about something that thing might leave us feeling troubled and
worried, but if we spend some time in adoration before the Blessed
Sacrament, or we say our Rosary calmly, at the end of that time of
prayer, we feel more tranquil.

The overall situation may be the same; it hasn\'t changed. But we are
different. Our heart is more at rest.

Even though that prayer may be very simple, or very poorly done, it was
done with faith. It\'s put us in contact with God. It\'s the peace of
God. God\'s peace has come to rest in our hearts.

Isaiah talks about the "river of peace" (Isa. 48:18) that prayer gives
us. Sometimes it\'s simply little drops. Maybe I\'m suffering; I\'m not
completely tranquil psychologically. But some drops of God\'s peace have
entered my heart. "The spark of the soul," as some writers have called
it.

That suffices for me to live through things differently, for me to be
more confident and stronger in facing situations.

This faithfulness to prayer is something urgent. It\'s not in front of
the television, or in browsing the Internet, or in endless conversations
with others that we find peace. Sometimes those things can leave us more
agitated than before.

Before the Blessed Sacrament, in front of Jesus, we always find a
modicum of the peace that we need. It\'s enough to take the necessary
time to be before Him, with an attitude of faith and hope, to be poor in
spirit. Expect everything from God\'s mercy and He will visit us.

Sometimes, it\'s an obligation for us to take the time to pray until we
regain our peace, and in that way not to make our fears and worries
weigh on others. It\'s a requirement of being charitable. It\'s
necessary to take this time.

If our prayer is often nourished by Holy Scripture, there can be moments
in life when only the Word of God has enough force, enough authority, to
permit us to regain the peace that we have lost. Our human reason is
often insufficient. But the Word of God is effective.

Our peace can be a fruit of trust. If we ask ourselves---what are the
essential conditions for me to get peace?---we\'d have to say the first
is trust, an absolute trust in the mercy of God and in His fidelity.

**I am with you always even until the end of the world** (Matt. 28:20).

That peace isn\'t always easy to practice. We don\'t always have sensory
proof of God\'s love and His presence. Life sometimes brings us the
heavy burden of suffering and dissolution. But that trust is necessary.

And even if God leads us on paths that aren\'t always those we would
want, He never betrays our trust.

St. Paul says to the Romans, **Hope does not disappoint us** (Rom. 5:5).

The principal enemy of our peace is not exterior circumstances, our
attitudes, and others. It\'s our lack of faith and trust in God that
makes us lose our certainty that He can draw good out of anything and
that He will never abandon us.

**All things turn out for the good for those who love God** (Rom. 8:28).

If we truly had faith, every difficult thing that happened to us
wouldn\'t be able to trouble our peace. The mountains of worry that
sometimes come would be quickly thrown into the sea.

The second essential condition for peace of heart is telling God "yes"
without hesitation, which means completely opening our hearts to Him and
being determined to refuse nothing to Him.

That doesn\'t mean that we must be perfect all of a sudden. But we have
to let God have full permission to enter our lives and lead us as He
desires.

To desire the will of God in all things isn\'t always easy. We\'re often
attacked by fear precisely because we lack this faith and trust. We
don\'t believe enough that God wants our happiness.

Sometimes we might have a terrible fear of giving ourselves completely
to God because we don\'t know where that will lead us and we would
prefer to remain masters of our destiny, to be sure that everything goes
according to our desires.

But that\'s a bad calculation. We don\'t really know what is good for
us. Only God really knows. It\'s much better to trust Him and leave
ourselves in His hands.

Everything in our life that was not given to God, sooner or later,
becomes a source of worry. And we\'re left then to manage it by
ourselves with our resources, our own light. This could create a lot of
anxiety for us.

On the contrary, if we have given everything to God, we\'re freed from
this burden of having to resolve everything by ourselves. It\'s the Lord
who will take care of it. And He will do it better than we can.

In St. Matthew we\'re told, **Come to me, all you who labor and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn
from me, for I am gentle and lowly in heart, and you will find rest for
your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light** (Matt.
11:28-30).

Life is lighter and simpler when we\'ve given everything to God. When we
seek only God, we\'re always at peace. Those who look to themselves and
want to manage and control their existence on their own can be loaded
down with heavy cares.

One of the great enemies of interior peace is the attachment to our own
ideas and our own will. So, detachment can be a source of peace. We have
the right to desire and want things. But we have always to retain a
certain freedom of heart, without worrying if things don\'t go as we
would have wished.

This detachment is itself founded on trust. God knows better than we do
what will make us grow. He wants our true happiness even more than we
do. The bigger the trust, the more we will be free and the more we will
find peace.

One of the sources of peace in our life can be humility.

People who are motivated by pride will never find true peace. They think
that they\'re better than others. They're filled with judgments or
disdain. They pretend to be self-sufficient and capable of doing
everything better than others.

They also want to control and manage their lives according to their own
wisdom, which they estimate as the best. They load themselves up with
big concerns.

Because of this, they can experience every failure more dramatically.
Every situation reveals their limits, their errors, their weaknesses.
They always feel menaced, always feel obliged to defend their image and
their brand. They may have the pretension of presenting a perfect image
of themselves without faults, which winds up being a heavy weight.

They can constantly be asking themselves: what do others think of me?
They can see others as rivals or as threats. And they can run the risk
of enclosing themselves in perfectionism---a pretense of doing
everything perfectly, of being the best in everything---which can create
constant stress. This type of perfectionism can be one of the worst
enemies of peace of heart.

The attitude of the humble person is different.

When they\'re confronted with their limits, their weaknesses, and their
errors, they accept them all peacefully. When something happens that
shows that they\'re imperfect, or they fall into some error, they\'re
not despondent or discouraged. They remain tranquil.

These people get up right away and throw themselves with trust into the
arms of their heavenly Father. They put all their hope in the mercy of
God, not in themselves.

They accept with simplicity that they\'re capable of falling, of making
mistakes, and that they need forgiveness. They accept the fact of not
being in a position to save themselves, but rather, that of receiving
salvation as a free gift of God\'s mercy.

They\'re even happy to depend entirely on the goodness of God.

Prideful people will always be at war with someone.

They\'re at war with God because they refuse to let themselves be led
like little children and be molded by the wisdom of God.

They\'re at war with others because of jealousy, because they disdain
them or see them as rivals. They\'re always in competition with others,
which in the end is quite tiring.

They\'re at war within themselves, because they don\'t accept the
weaknesses, the poverty that exist in every person.

They\'re at war with life because they pretend to be successful in
everything, refusing any circumstance that unveils their poverty, or
their weakness, or their fragility.

Humble people, on the other hand, will be at peace with God. They submit
to Him and let Him educate them like children.

They\'ll be at peace with others, because they accept others as they
are, and remain open to them, not in competition with anybody.

They\'ll be at peace with themselves, because they accept their own
weakness and imperfections. They\'re not worried about their faults or
failures.

They\'re at peace with life because they have no pretenses about
controlling or dominating everything, but know how to welcome reality as
it is, and abandon themselves to God\'s hands.

This is the sort of peace that we see continually in the life of Our
Lady, a consequence of the words she said at the Annunciation: **Be it
done unto me** (Luke 1:38). The sky is the limit. Ask whatever you want.

We can ask the Queen of Peace that she might help that peace remain in
our hearts now and always, and to help us spread that out very much to
those around us.

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, Saint
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*NJF*
