---
layout: homily
title: "The Grandfather"
---


By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

Today is the feast of Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal. It is also the
anniversary of the death of the Grandfather, who had great devotion to
Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal.

Our Father didn\'t speak much about his family, but he let it be known
very clearly that God had used his parents and his family, Aunt Carmen,
and all the events of his family life to shape the spirit of Opus Dei.
He saw very clearly that part of our spirit is that we should be a
family, not just an organization or a group of people that have come
together to do something good and nice in society.

He saw that the family spirit was something very central, very crucial,
the will of God. It\'s something that we have to try and decipher in all
situations, to see in all its richness and beauty, and to take very good
care of, because Opus Dei is a family, a supernatural family.

St. Josemaría liked to say that we belong to the family of Nazareth. He
said in Spanish, *A esa familia, partenecemos*. We belong to that
family.

Everything related to the family for us is important. Our Father had a
horror that we might live like strangers. He wanted us to be very close
to our sisters and our brothers, those people that God has placed around
us. To think out of the box like any family.

He gave us the criteria to put our hearts on the ground so that others
could walk easier. He said we have to try and steal a little bit of
heaven so that other people can experience that heaven around us.

He said nobody has the job or the assignment to mortify other people or
to make life difficult for them. Part of our role is to make life easier
for others so they can feel the family. There are occasions when all of
us in our life need to feel the family: I\'m surrounded by people who
love me, who care for me, who watch out for me, who watch my back, who
are thinking and praying about me all the time. That\'s why it\'s
wonderful to belong to such a family.

Our Father pointed out that one of the greatest acts of supernatural
love we can practice with others is fraternal correction.

If ever we have to give the fraternal correction and we find it a bit
difficult, it can be helpful to think, This is the greatest act of
supernatural love that I can practice with any person God has placed
beside me. It\'s a sign that I love them, that I care for them, that I
want them to be holy, I want them to get to heaven.

It\'s one of the greatest acts of love of our family that we can have.
We preserve our spirit through fraternal correction, through living this
family spirit.

Likewise, if we ever receive a fraternal correction, it can be really
helpful also to go over those ideas in our mind: this is the greatest
act of supernatural affection somebody can practice with me. It\'s a
sign I'm not alone, that I belong to a family, and that people love and
care for me.

In this very rich family spirit, our Father \[St. Josemaría\] saw that
God wanted to use his own family to mold this spirit. The family spirit
of Opus Dei is molded by the family spirit of the family of Escrivá de
Balaguer. That\'s why they occupy such a prominent place in our life.

God used the Grandfather, the Grandmother, and Aunt Carmen to shape our
spirit. Today is a day that we highlight that particular aspect of our
family spirit. Our Father said that devotion to the Grandparents and
Aunt Carmen is a very central aspect of our spirit.

Today is a very good day to pray to the Grandfather. Grandfathers are
people who tend to be a little bit in the background, sort of watching
everything that\'s taking place, but keeping quiet. But they see and
understand everything that\'s going on.

Grandfathers are people that you can go to who always have a soft heart.
Often grandparents will grant things to their grandchildren that their
parents won\'t grant them for various reasons. They spoil them.

Today is a really good day to ask the Grandfather to spoil us a little
bit, to grant us this virtue, or this other favor, or this other little
thing, and live our spirit very much.

Our Father left us a very beautiful picture of the Grandfather. He was a
very good man in the town of Barbastro. He had a lot of tragedy in his
life: those three sisters died one after the other. We hear a lot about
the impact that that had on the Grandmother. But you get the impression
that the Grandfather was there in the background, sort of handling all
these things. A bit like St. Joseph. Solving the problems, going
forward, and helping the family to get through these trials.

At the same time, very open to life: they had that other child later on
in life. It can\'t have been so easy with all the responsibility that
that brought with it.

We know that his business did not go so well. There was a big crisis and
he had to leave Barbastro and go and get a job in Logroño. The family
took a step down the social ladder; and went through difficult times.

It\'s a very interesting thing for us to remember because our own blood
families, or the families that we know, or families of the Work might go
through similar things. It\'s a normal thing in this life. Some people
have to take a step down or a step backward or whatever, and go through
rough times.

It\'s good that we remember where our family has come from---what our
Father suffered and our Grandfather suffered: humiliation; beginning
again when he wasn\'t so young; having to work as a supporter in
somebody else\'s business.

All this is a very wonderful example of virtue for us. Our Father saw
all this taking place before his eyes.

At the same time, we find written down in certain biographies that the
Grandfather was able to pay off all of his creditors---people that he
owed money to. Some of his relatives thought that that wasn\'t necessary
and that he was gullible, or that he was a bit stupid, or that he put
his own family in a difficult situation. But it shows he was a very
honest man. A man of great integrity. That can be a great example for us
also.

We have a legacy, a family spirit that is very beautiful, and very rich:
how to behave in certain circumstances as an honorable person. While
reading between the lines, we also find that there were relatives, I
think on both sides of the family, who thought he was a bit naive. He
would have suffered a bit for that also. I think some other relatives
could have helped a little bit, but perhaps they didn\'t.

All of this can lead us to have great sympathy for the Grandfather, that
he might always have a place in our hearts so that we can run to him and
ask him for those favors.

In the January 1980 letter, the letter that Don Álvaro wrote on the 50th
anniversary of the founding of the Women of the Prelature, he talks a
lot about this family atmosphere. It's a very wonderful letter to go
back and read from time to time, and see how central that family
atmosphere is to our whole vocation.

In a special way, Catering is entrusted with creating that family
atmosphere, of making our centers into homes---homes where we feel that
family and feel that family atmosphere. Homes that have little items of
décor, taste, or cleanliness, all sorts of little details. Often family
life is made up of details.

We're called in our professional work to be experts in that area. The
work of the Catering is the work of caring. It\'s a profession of
caring. We can never care too much. It means our hearts and our minds
are theirs. Good professional people.

Blessed Álvaro says this spirit gives a special character, a family air
to our personal lives. We are not people without a family. It gives a
unique flavor to all our work. It was clearly implanted by God in our
Father\'s heart from the moment He chose him as His instrument to
implement the Work. It\'s not something extra or added on, or sort of an
icing on the cake. It\'s part of the very central aspect of our spirit.
Therefore, everything related to the family of our Father is important.

One year I had to wrap Christmas presents when I came to Kenya. I sat
the whole of Christmas Eve wrapping Christmas presents because there was
a whole pile of people in the center and not a single present had been
wrapped.

I had a lot of time to think about that particular Christmas Eve. I
remember thinking I don\'t think I\'ve ever wrapped a Christmas present
in the last twenty years, or even thirty years. It sort of all came at
once. I was thinking there must be an awful lot of members of Opus Dei
in centers all over the world that are spending today wrapping Christmas
presents.

Are there people rushing out at the last minute to buy that last little
present that is needed? I began to think of all those people in all
those centers spending all that time wrapping Christmas presents, and
other people that would have gone out to buy them. They would have spent
all that money, and even the money on the wrapping paper. If you add all
of that up all over the world it must come to something enormous. I had
a lot of time to think about this.

I was thinking that our Father must have seen all of this---that it was
going to cost an awful lot of time and money for all eternity---that
members of Opus Dei who live in the centers, and the associates, have
Father Christmas, and Santa Claus and wrap these presents and buy them
and have them. That\'s what must have gone through our Father\'s mind:
look, let\'s not bother with all of this. Let\'s focus more on more
recollections, more circles, more classes---all these other things we
could be doing.

He could have decreed: On Christmas Day everyone in Opus Dei will get a
pencil. Unwrapped. The director will come to the get-together after
lunch and say: Here\'s your pencil and here\'s your pencil and here\'s
your pencil. And that\'s it. We don\'t spend any time and money on the
business of wrapping Christmas presents.

But our Father didn\'t say that. He saw that that business of having
Father Christmas, and every person getting one or two little things and
a little funny little joke---it's part of our family spirit, a custom
that we live. We go to great lengths to live it because we all love to
get something that\'s wrapped up nice. Even if we know what\'s inside,
we still love to get it.

I was living with a philosopher once. And his joke-gift of Christmas: he
was always talking about metaphysics and being. He got a matchbox with
nothing inside. The little piece of paper that was written in the
matchbox said: This is a box full of nothing. A very philosophical idea.

Even if we get a little matchbox full of nothing---probably we won\'t in
our whole life; that only happens to philosophers---we also get a little
bit of a kick out of this thing. It\'s a childlike little spirit. All
those things in our family are important.

I have no doubt whatsoever, Don Álvaro says, that this spirit, which is
both a supernatural and a wonderful human reality, was already alive in
the soul of our Founder, brought to life there by his sacrifice and that
of his own family: the Grandparents, Aunt Carmen, and Uncle Santiago.

We can ask the Grandfather today for many special things. Big things.
Perhaps things we don\'t dare to ask our Father for are a great love of
our vocation, a great love of our family spirit, and a great love and
care for all those things that make up that family spirit.

Care of get-togethers: we come with things to say. Some people find it
very easy to talk in get-togethers, and some people don\'t find it easy
at all. We might be one of those people who find it easy to talk. Maybe
we have to stop talking so much and let other people talk.

Or we might have to make a bigger effort to be more loquacious and say
more things; find those apostolic anecdotes to bring to the get-together
to brighten up everybody\'s life around us, so that they can also savor
those moments of family life, and all the activities that are family
activities: our prayer in the morning, our Mass, other events that we do
together, our recollection, our retreat, our annual course. We also take
very good care to live that family spirit. Punctuality, order,
presence---all these things are important.

We show our love and our importance to the family gatherings by being
there a few minutes before and seeing the example we receive from people
older in the Work of how they take care of those things.

Most sacrifices, we\'re told, have been foreseen in God\'s plan to shape
His work. Listen now, my children, to these confidential words of our
beloved Founder: "I don\'t find it easy," he said, "to talk about my
parents. And the same probably happens to you, my children. I feel
rather sensitive about this. I see it as God\'s providence that my
mother and my sister Carmen should have helped us so much to have this
family atmosphere at Work. God wanted it that way.

"To give an example, there are 300 people living in the central house,
and yet each part of this house is a family home, with bonds stronger
than those of any natural family. We are united in our hearts, wills,
and desires. The promised hundredfold can be seen so clearly. I can
assure you, my children, that it is you, my daughters and sons, who
reign uppermost in my heart."

He gives us this example of 300 people living together, and yet every
part of this house is a part of a family home. The numbers don\'t
matter. We live that spirit in every corner.

Our Father used to say that in every corner of the homes of the
supernumeraries and the associates, that same family atmosphere has to
reign there. It speaks to us with sometimes immaterial details of care,
of cleanliness, of hygiene, of taste, all these things.

He said, "I love all the members of my natural family because I am bound
to it in charity and justice. But there are so many things that take
precedence over them."

A very important statement: "So many things that take precedence over
them." I love my natural family, but they\'re on a secondary plane.
They\'re not the big thing in my life.

There\'s a very important Christian concept, which is that the family we
form is more important than the family we come from. In many cultures
that\'s not so clear.

In Asia, grandparents sometimes have great authority in their
children\'s homes. They can decide what color the painting should be on
the wall of their living room.

But in Christianity, that\'s not the way. When children form a family,
they decide what color they want on their living room wall. There are
all sorts of other little details.

Natural parents have to take a step back when their children get
married. Let them follow the pathway of their vocation in life. They
have to learn how to be in the back seat.

When we come to the Work, we come to give everything. We come to find
this family and take part in it. So our own blood family takes a
secondary place. We love them very much, but they\'re not the most
important. We try to take care of them, very often spiritually, and if
we can, materially. But we see that our place is in my home.

Our Father always emphasized that the greatest service that we give to
the members of our blood family is fidelity to our vocation. Very often
we are their ticket into heaven. If we have brothers and sisters who are
far away from God or the Church, and their lives are not what they might
be, maybe that becomes all the more important.

Our greatest gift is to live our spirit well, to give priority to the
things of our family, the apostolate, our availability to go here, to go
there, to do this, to do that.

I heard one of the early numeraries in the Philippines once was asked to
go to a certain center, and a few months later, was asked to change to
another one. She told me she was a bit advanced in years, and all this
change wasn\'t so easy, moving around the place. But she said, "When I
brought it to my prayer, I saw that, well, that\'s why I\'m a numerary."

There\'s great wisdom in those words. "That\'s why I\'m a numerary." God
can move me around the way he wants. Plug me in here, plug me in there,
solve this other problem, move here, change center, change country,
wherever I\'m needed.

That\'s very much the spirit of the Holy Family: Our Lady and St.
Joseph. Go to Bethlehem, go to Egypt, stay there, now come back.

We belong to this family, with the same spirit. There's nothing
particularly unusual about this. Our Father is telling us that the
things of our family have to take precedence over everything. I love my
blood family, but so many things come before them.

He says, "They come far behind, my children, on a different level. I\'m
not ashamed to tell you that you sustain me humanly. I only have to
think of you, each one of you, by name, to feel strong and secure, no
matter how many things may be going wrong. If, on the supernatural
plane, it is the grace of God that keeps me going each day, on the human
plane it is you whom I rely on, and I strive to send you pure arterial
blood. I cannot allow the body of the Work to become anemic and weak.
You see now why I call you my crown and my joy, my staff, and my
delight."

Our Father is teaching us that we have to be thinking about those people
God has placed around us, our day on guard, our *Memorare*for the person
who needs it most. Counting the sheep, thinking of those people God has
placed there---how can I help them? What can I do for them? Maybe they
need my company, maybe they need an extra hand in their department.

Maybe they\'re not feeling so well today. Maybe they need a funny story
to make them more cheerful or something or help them through this
moment. Or maybe they just need my silent presence when they\'re not
well, or their company to go here or go shopping or something.

A very good question to ask: What can I contribute? How can I make the
life of the people around me more pleasant today? And often we do that
just with our presence, being there.

Imagine if we were all alone in this big center, and here we are, living
out the spirit of Opus Dei, with nobody around us. Our sisters give us a
great example: their presence at the prayer in the morning, their
presence at Mass when they\'re living their norms when they\'re talking
about apostolate. We\'re surrounded by good examples all the time,
leading us forward, and reminding us every day what is the really
important thing in our lives.

"Don\'t you see, my daughters and sons," continues Blessed Álvaro, "how
good a teacher our Divine Master is? He wants us to be committed and
involved in a ceaseless struggle that requires complete self-denial on
our part."

The work is a militia and at the same time, a family. So many homes form
just one home. Our Father liked that idea of militia: we\'re an army.
We\'re a family but we\'re also an army, and we\'re an army on the
march. We\'re going places, we\'re doing things, we have a job to do, a
mission. On the one hand, we\'re a family, feeling very nice together;
but at the same time, we\'re fighting a battle.

We have to have a military-like mentality. A home endowed with human and
supernatural affection, but not soft sentimentality.

At the same time that we\'re a family, our Father wanted us to have a
certain hardcore, toughness, an interior toughness, fortitude. It\'s a
place where each one can find, in company with Jesus, Mary, and Joseph,
a renewal of strength and vigor to persevere in the struggle and to give
his life with Christ.

We\'re coming into a period of Advent where we\'re going to accompany
the Holy Family along their journey to Bethlehem. It\'s very good to see
that it\'s a very beautiful picture when we see it on Christmas cards or
in paintings, but the reality of that journey was nothing with
simplicity, or nothing childlike, or sentimentality. It was a tough
journey, full of self-denial, abandonment, and uncertainty, and
detachment; faith, humility, and hope; and solving problems, getting
over the difficulties.

The journey of the Holy Family to Bethlehem is like a model of our
vocation, handling the problems of each day, and taking weight. Joseph
took a lot of weight, big decisions, handling tough things that were
placed in his hands. Sometimes we might have an extra bit of work, and a
lot of responsibility on our hands, or maybe something will go wrong
someday, and we have to try and solve the problem.

With that same spirit that we see in the Holy Family, we belong to that
family, we find our peace there, our hope, our joy. In spite of the
difficulties, because we\'re with the Christ Child because our heart is
in the right place, we\'re full of consolation and joy.

As our Father put it so vividly on the 6th of November 1974, "We are a
small corner of the house of Nazareth." If we place ourselves out on
that journey to Bethlehem and watch very closely, we learn an awful lot
of the virtues that we need daily: committed; seeing what the will of
God is, and giving ourselves completely, generously, to fulfill it; not
being put off by the difficulties, rejection, misunderstanding, 'no room
at the inn.' There is a solution here.

When we start the Work in different places, often there are similar
challenges that have to go through. We are called, he said, to share a
home with Jesus, Mary, and Joseph, because, as our Father reminded us in
a meditation at the Oratory of the General Council on the 19th of
January 1975, we belong to that family.

The death anniversary of the Grandfather is a special day for us. It
especially enters our hearts. It brings us a special joy that we
remember our Grandfather and the great legacy that he\'s left us that we
have to try and transmit to others.

He took care of and built up that family spirit of Escrivá de Balaguer
so well. Our Father liked to say that he attributed his vocation to his
father. Interesting statement.

Grandfather was a great guy. We have great love for him. He will lead us
to the Grandmother and Aunt Carmen. He shaped those souls in so many
ways. He shaped the soul of our Father with his virtue.

That\'s a great idea for our life: to seek holiness and apostolate where
Our God has placed us. We all belong, he says, numeraries, assistant
numeraries, associates, and supernumeraries---we all form part of that
home.

We have all received the same vocation: to bring within our soul the
warmth of Christ\'s love to our family life in the houses where our
centers are, or in the family homes in which most of my daughters and
sons live. We transmit this spirit to all the cooperators, St. Gabriel
people, and supernumeraries.

The family spirit of our homes and our centers is formative. Everything
in the center is meant to give formation. We take care of this little
ornament, and that painting, and that floor, and the laying of the
table, and the laundry, and the care of the departments and the work
that we do, because that all contributes to our family spirit. We don\'t
know where the fruits of that work are going to reach.

I remember a person at Work in Singapore telling me, that when he goes
to work, some of the people in his office used to say, Who irons your
shirts? He couldn\'t figure out that day by day, week by week, the
shirts are ironed so well.

If our sisters could have heard that compliment, I think they would have
been purring with satisfaction. These people in the office knew that he
was not married, and lived alone---this mystery of how well your shirts
are ironed.

A lot of the fruits of our work, we don\'t see ourselves, what are
there. It\'s an apostolate. It transmits a message to other people that
we belong to a family.

In this way, the home at Nazareth is made present in very many physical
places in the world, which have been so prepared by God to give a
fitting welcome to His Son.

Joseph and Mary, and particularly Joseph, create the family atmosphere
in Bethlehem, in a place that was not particularly suited. They turned
that dirty, filthy, smelly place for animals into a focal point of
family warmth. That\'s a little bit of what we\'re called to do with our
work every day. Something very beautiful, very rich, to lift souls---we
lift the whole of society.

In our care of the oratories, it\'s a whole catechesis for the universal
Church. "Don\'t think that the virtues and the tone and character of
this home are confined to the physical buildings of our centers. Like
our Father, I\'m speaking to the hearts of all my daughters and sons, no
matter where they work or rest, spend their time after their day\'s
work, or enjoy their family life. The home of Opus Dei, like the home of
Nazareth, is not confined to a space enclosed by four walls."

The Grandfather had a great role in this whole enterprise that has
reached the ends of the earth. And here we are, speaking about him with
gratitude, for we absorbed that spirit, we absorbed all the sensitivity
that\'s there. We have a great responsibility to live that out, giving
an example to people.

Very often family spirit and family life are made up of details. Our
Father was very attentive to details: this small thing here, this small
thing there, this kind word, putting a little picture straight, double
checking, the laying of a table, the mopping of a floor, the answering
of a door. All these things are part of our journey of sanctification.

The Work then is a militia and a home, struggle, peace, joyous
renunciation, and charity full of tenderness. Nazareth and Calvary.

We can ask Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal today that she might help us
to go a little deeper into this family spirit, to absorb it a little
better, to understand it better, to see and appreciate the role of the
Grandfather and to develop a constant spirit of gratitude for what he
has done, and to stimulate our devotion to the Grandparents and Aunt
Carmen, so that we learn from their example, and we get them to help us
to put this family spirit into practice so that everybody around us can
feel the family a little more, because of all the details that we look
after.

Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal, pray for us.

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, Saint
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*KI*

*Editor's Note: José Escrivá y Corzán (1867-1924) was the father of St.
Josemaría Escrivá. He is affectionately referred to as "The Grandfather"
by the faithful of Opus Dei. He passed away on November 27, 1924, when
St. Josemaría was 22 years old.*
