---
layout: homily
title: "In the Heart of Joseph and Mary"
---

By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

This meditation is about Mary and Joseph in the Heart of Jesus,
basically focusing on marriage and the family.

We\'re asked to think about divine love and human affection. Our God, in
His deepest mystery, is not a solitary being, but a family.

Pope St. John Paul liked to say that God is a communion of persons and
that the family is a communion of persons (John Paul II, *General
Audiences*, November 14, 1979; October 22, 1980; *Catechism of the
Catholic Church*, Points 2205, 2331).

He liked to say that the Blessed Trinity is a life-giving communion of
persons: a love of the Father for the Son gives rise to the Holy Spirit
(cf. Pope John Paul II, *Revelation of the Trinitarian Mystery*, *The
Queen*, Vol. 010, September 2021) and marriage is also a life-giving
communion of persons.

God\'s inner life is paternity, filiation, and the essence of the
family, which is love.

Occasionally we hear that phrase repeated, that "God is love" (1 John
4:8,16). That phrase from Scripture is so very powerful, so very
central. It\'s the essence of everything we live for, and that we have
to transmit to people: charity.

Sanctity is charity. As we grow in sanctity, we try to grow in charity.
It\'s on that, that we will be judged.

And so, all the time we could ask God that He who is love might shine a
little more in our lives, so that in everything we say and everything we
do, that central message might get transmitted in the same way that our
Father was able to transmit that message.

Christ is love. The Church is love. The spirit of Opus Dei is love.
Everything that we\'re involved in has to do with love.

Often that charity is manifested by order: order in our affections,
loving the people and the things that we should love in first place:
family values or family priorities.

We\'ve heard this phrase, 'Love in your heart was not put there to stay.
Love is not love until you give it away' (*Letter*, Oscar Hammerstein).
Love is wanting life\'s best for another, even if that doesn\'t include
us.

Whenever John Paul talked about love, he liked to talk about love as
giving. It\'s all focused on giving, not on getting.

We can ask Our Lord for the grace to be more compassionate---with the
compassion of Christ, *compatior*, and of His Mother. May we show others
the love that He has shown to us.

Many years ago, I was living in a place called Belagua *Fase Dos* in
Pamplona and every day there were about 100 university students. Every
day after lunch, there was a get-together.

Everyone was supposed to attend the get-together, but of course, the
get-together competes with the siesta. So usually there was about 30
percent attendance.

Occasionally, if there were an invited guest---a celebrity visiting town
or a local professor, or somebody like that---the attendance would go up
to about 50 percent.

One day in the year a lady was invited, and suddenly there was 100
percent attendance. It was the event of the year. It was historic.
Nobody wanted to miss it.

This lady was a supernumerary lady who had eight children and she was a
professor of psychology. When she started to speak at the get-together,
she began to speak about what it meant to be a mother. I was wondering,
'Did she get her topic wrong?' because these guys are never going to be
mothers.

But then I looked around the room and saw all the jaws were hanging
open. They were all fascinated.

She talked about what it meant to be a mother. They all knew what a
mother was, but it never crossed their mind for a moment to think about
what it meant to be a mother.

She narrated some very homey details from her domestic life, saying she
and her husband were both academicians, so they were a bit disordered by
nature---one shoe here, one shoe there, sometimes the clothes on the
back of the chair.

She said, "As our children grew, we began to realize that they were
imitating our example. Our battle in our family life was to try and
practice the virtues a little more---to put our two shoes together, to
hang up our clothes." Our whole get-together was full of these sorts of
earthly details.

Then she said, "A mother has to try and be different things to her
growing children at different stages of their development.

"To the two-year-old, she has to be the nappy changer, because that\'s
one of the most crucial services that she has to provide.

"To the six-year-old, she has to be the mom who gets down on her hands
and knees and plays with the dolls' house or the Lego, or whatever it
is.

"To the ten-year-old, she has to be the mom that puts on a bit of makeup
or gets her hair done. When she comes to collect her ten-year-old son
from school, he can dig the other guy in the ribs and say, 'That\'s my
mom over there, the good-looking one.'

"And to the 16-year-old," she said, "she has to be the intellectual mom
that keeps abreast of current affairs, maybe has a novel going; is able
to keep up an intellectual conversation with her budding intellectual
child, and doesn\'t give him the impression that the last time an idea
went through her head was before she got married."

Of course, this lady was panning out an amazing challenge of motherhood
that was reminiscent of St. Paul\'s phrase that we have to try and be
"all things to all men" (cf. 1 Cor. 9:22).

Of course, you can say the same thing about a father, and indeed about a
grandfather; different roles.

"What can I contribute?" You\'ve probably read Drucker\'s *The Effective
Executive* (Peter Drucker, 1967), where he focuses on what makes people
effective. He says they ask not just good questions, but the right
questions.

And the right question is, "What can I contribute?" It\'s a very good
question to ask in relation to our family, to our marriage, to our
children, to our grandchildren, our grandnieces and nephews; keeps us
very focused, keeps us oriented towards giving, towards being that
effective person in our environment, in our home; and helps us to focus
a lot on self-giving to others and a spirit of service.

"What can I contribute?" means "How can I serve?"

Our Father used to say that in Bethlehem and Nazareth, "nobody holds
anything back" (cf. Josemaría Escrivá, *Letter*, February 14, 1974).
We\'re beginning to look towards Bethlehem once again, perhaps planning
this special Christmas, which has its own graces.

I don\'t know about you there, but certainly here, and particularly in
the Priestly Society of the Holy Cross, we are seeing a lot of very
special things happening that can only be the result of grace.

The current difficulties are bringing their benefits with them. Our Lord
invites us in our family to be there as one who serves. "I am among
you," He said in St. Luke, "as one who serves" (Luke 22:27).

I heard a professor in the Philippines say once that the purpose of
education is service. The purpose of our formation is service, because
Christ came "not to be served, but to serve" (Matt. 20:28).

We might think that in our home, at our age, in our situation, maybe we
earn the privilege of being served, but Our Lord tells us otherwise.
"The greatesFat must be the servant of all" (Mark 9:35).

The pathway of Christ is a pathway of service, also thanking God for all
the good things He\'s given to us in our life, and possibly we take for
granted.

There was a manager of a five-star hotel in Singapore a number of years
ago who was a Catholic. He was a parishioner in a fairly prominent
parish there that used to be run by Irish Jesuit priests.

This manager was changing the bedsheets of his hotels. He had a thousand
bedsheets to give away. He asked the parish priest if he had any use for
a thousand bedsheets, which he didn\'t, but he knew that I had moved
here to Kenya. And so, that parish priest sent me a thousand bedsheets.

We distributed them in various places. But at that time, we had a
technical school that was starting in a very depressed area of the city
called Eastlands, and we had started a sort of a shelter for street
kids. There are about 60,000 street kids on the streets of Nairobi. We
had about maybe thirty or forty of them who would come there to sleep at
night.

We gave them some of these bedsheets. A week or so later, I was chatting
to one of these guys, maybe nine or ten years of age.

I asked him, "How are the bedsheets?" knowing that they had never had
bedsheets before. And he said, "They\'re going very well, but I was
wondering if, the next time, they could be black."

I was sort of wondering, you know, why would you want black sheets? He
said, "So they don\'t show the dirt." Perfectly normal male psychology.

I told him, "I would try and transmit that message to the manager of the
five-star hotel in Singapore and ask him if he wouldn\'t mind changing
all his bedsheets to black."

We could form a whole new culture of hospitality. If you go someplace
and you find that there are black bedsheets, you may know where the idea
is from.

But what was interesting was to see this little kid who\'d never had
these things before come up with this incredible idea.

When you hear stories like that, you sort of realize how many things in
our home that we may take for granted and never even think about.

Our Lord, when He washed the feet of the apostles, said, "I\'ve given
you an example so that you may copy what I have done to you" (cf. John
13:15).

We have to copy that example in order to try and transmit that example
and those values to many other people. Our children and our
grandchildren are watching. They\'re learning. Our educative,
informative role never ends.

The virtues that we try to put into practice in the home, over time, can
yield incredible results. We might not see those results immediately,
but very often they\'re there.

Father Joseph de Torre in the Philippines, who beforehand was in
Ireland, wrote so many philosophy books. You may have seen some of them.
He used to say that patience is a great social force.

I used to find that phrase very consoling: patience is a great social
force. The seeds that we sow with our example take time to germinate.
Maybe God wants to count on years, decades, maybe centuries, before all
those seeds yield their abundant fruit.

There are many beautiful fruits we are seeing at the moment in this
country from all the work of the Irish missionaries. The major schools
in Kenya for the last century have been run by the Holy Spirit Fathers
and by the Loreto Sisters.

Half the country has passed through those schools. Many heroic lives.
Some of them are still alive---there\'s one who\'s 101; there\'s another
who\'s 99---I see them from time to time; very inspiring examples.

But of course, the fruit of their lives---you see a lot of it is coming
over time---a whole century of effort.

That\'s a bit of a story there because one of the first Loreto Sisters
who came here in 1921, or shortly after, had fought in the Irish War of
Independence.

Sister Theresa O\'Sullivan, I think, was her name. It was after that,
that she found her vocation as a Loreto nun, and then they sent her to
Kenya to fight the British again, with all due respect to all the
British.

She set up the first school for African girls in the whole of East
Africa. You look back now and see what that meant---an incredible thing
to have achieved. Now they tell all these stories, which are not very
well known in the world.

But of course, a lot of these stories, and the seeds that have been
sown, take an awful long time to yield all their abundant harvest.

In our families, the efforts that we make to practice those virtues will
also yield their abundant fruit in due time.

But we have to keep focusing on the goal of our vocation---holiness in
marriage---immersing ourselves in the Heart of Mary, in the Heart of
Jesus, in the heart of Joseph, and working at being experts in this
mission that God has given to us.

There was a guy in the formal final year of the school in Manila who was
a very average student. But his achievement was way above his capacity
in many ways. I think he had three sisters. He was an only son.

His father was a very busy businessman. He had a lot of important
businesses, but somehow he was very close to his son.

We\'ve heard our Father say many times that parents should try and be
very good friends with their children (J. Escrivá, *Conversations*,
Point 100).

It's an easy thing to say, but in my experience, it\'s not such an easy
thing to achieve.

Of all the people I\'ve met in the last number of decades, I think this
man managed it more than others. I asked him, 'How did you manage this?
What was the secret of your success?'

He told me, 'You know, I gave up the cocktail circuit and I try to be
home at six each evening. I spent about an hour chatting to my son, and
so we\'re really buddy-buddies. We know what\'s going on in each
other\'s lives. We\'re very close. My son eventually got into an Ivy
League university in the States. He did very well.'

But then I asked the father, 'But what gave you this motivation to have
that focus, to spend so much time on your son and your family?' This man
was not a member of the Work. He was a cooperator, but not a very active
one.

He told me, 'I spent some time working on Wall Street and I got to know
this Jew on Wall Street who was very successful. We became good friends.

'One time he invited me one weekend to his home in upstate New York for
the weekend. He brought me there and it took us about five minutes to
get from the gate of the house to the house. That was because the car
was breaking down. It was an incredible mansion.

Then he showed me room by room around this mansion. A beautiful place.
Then we came to his bedroom and over his bed, there was a big poster, a
big sign, that said, "The greatest failure of a man is to fail as a
father."

'What this guy told me, you know, I was mesmerized, a bit perplexed.
Here is this guy who\'s so successful professionally and he has a
statement of failure over his bed.'

'I asked him, What\'s this all about? He said, You see when I was on the
up and up on Wall Street, I put my kids into boarding school, and then
Christmas time came and I was very busy. So I just sort of left them
there. Then the summertime came and the same thing, I sort of left them
there also. This went on for a couple of years. And now, one of my kids
is on drugs, and another one on something else, and a third one on
something else.

He painted a not very savory picture. This Filipino father told me, 'I
came home, and I made out my own sign and I hung it over my own bed to
remind myself, no matter how successful I may have become in all sorts
of ways, the greatest failure was to fail as a father.'

Through the formation that we get in the Work, the ideas that we\'re
constantly reminded about, we\'re helped to be a great success as a
father.

Of course, the fruits of that effort may not be seen for many years to
come. It may be a long time before all of those seeds yield their
abundant fruit: fruits of our prayer, fruits of our sacrifice that you
might not see in your children, but it might come in your grandchildren
or in your great-grandchildren, but it will come, because we can have
great faith that God repays "a hundredfold" (Mark 10:30).

"If you, evil as you are, know how to give good gifts to your children,
how much more will your heavenly Father give good things to those who
ask him?" (Matt. 7:11).

We can have great faith and trust in the graces that God is giving to
us, in the apostolate of the family, of our marriage, of the role we
play on the streets where we live, and the extended family that we
belong to.

Often in the silent example we give when we practice our norms or we get
to Mass, we try and live cheerfulness or that spirit of service in our
home.

Our perseverance and loyalty in little things. We know that more is
something that God wants to give us and that will come. He has great
fruits prepared for our lives.

We can have a great confidence. We can thank God for the treasure of
this vocation that He\'s given to us and maintain that sense of treasure
in our married vocation and in our family.

I heard a story once of two guys who had stopped going to Mass on Sunday
and they borrowed their father\'s car. They went for a drive in the
mountains, and then they saw a man coming across the fields and he was
handicapped; he was lame.

They were good guys, so they thought they\'d stop and give him a lift.
They took him into the car. It was a Sunday morning. They asked him
where he was going. He was going to Mass and the church was still a few
kilometers away.

This man was handicapped, so they brought him to the church. Then they
weren\'t really doing anything special so they thought they should do
the good thing and wait for him and give him a ride back afterwards.

They went into Mass. There was a priest hearing Confession; they went to
Confession and got Communion. Then they gave the man a lift back
afterwards to where they had picked him up, and he went off across the
fields.

The story said he didn\'t say anything to these guys; didn\'t give out
to them for not going to Mass regularly, or for the life they were
leading, or all the funny ways they were living.

But what he did give them was the silent example of his faith, of his
sacrifice, of his heroism, of his living out his Christian vocation in
the way that God wanted him to live it.

We never know, in the place where God has placed us, how He\'s using us
to sow the seeds that He wants to sow in the souls of the people that
He\'s placed around you.

Hopefully, we\'ll live to see, or see from heaven, the great fruits that
are going to come from there: the evangelization of culture, the
civilization of love---all these marvelous goals that Pope St. John
Paul, whose feast day we celebrate tomorrow, has placed before us---the
culture of life---in spite of the difficulties, in spite of all the
chips being down.

If you read about the early Christians and the environment that they had
to put up with, all the time, things seem to be becoming more and more
similar.

But yet we know we have great things to look forward to. Don Álvaro
talked about the new flourishing of the Church, the new flourishing of
the family (Álvaro del Portillo, Talk, *Priests for a New
Evangelization*). We\'re bringing that about little by little in the
ordinary things that we're doing.

In relation to St. Benedict, an author liked to say, "External monotony
is an invitation to inner change, whereas novelty and constant variety
short-circuit the process of going deeper" (Michael Casey, *Truthful
Living: St. Benedict\'s Teaching on Humility*).

The period that we may be living through in society or in our own
personal life might precisely be a period of external monotony, but yet
carrying with it great graces for future change.

Our Lord gives great dignity to family life. He wants us to create that
atmosphere, to think about it, to become experts, aristocrats, in this
whole business of the family, seeing what we can contribute, how we can
help other families, and encouraging them with our words, with our
deeds; sometimes just by listening, understanding, excusing, forgiving,
working on that business of communication in marriage.

There\'s a couple in Singapore who told me that they have organized the
marriage preparation course for about twenty-five years.

They told me that every week or every month, they have a timeout, and
they sit down, and they write down all the things that have annoyed them
in the previous week or so.

Little statements, little things that happened, things that may be
difficult to express verbally---they write them down. They spend a bit
of time doing this and then they swap papers. They read what the other
person has written down, and then they apologize and begin again.

It\'s great to have little habits like that, whereby we can train other
people to grow, to build up great families, great marriages, so that, as
Stenson says, we can "build up great human beings" (cf. James Stenson,
Talk, *Educating in Virtue*), people who can take their place in the
world and in the Church, and do wonderful things for the future, knowing
that the grace of God is working in all sorts of ways.

I was at the 60th anniversary of a Loreto nun last year, an Irish Loreto
nun from Armagh. An amazing character.

She talks about how when she was six in her kindergarten school, a
priest came to give them a talk. He was an Irish priest missionary in
Africa talking to six-year-old kids. He asked them to pray for all the
little children in Africa who didn\'t know Jesus.

Now you might think that talking to six-year-old kids---things go in one
ear and out the other. But this little girl took this very seriously.

Now, after being sixty years in Kenya, she talks about how 'that was the
beginning of my vocation.'

She said, 'Later in life, I went to look for that priest to find out who
he was. He must have been an SMA or a Holy Spiritan or somebody, but we
couldn\'t find him.'

She often remembers the faith of that priest going to talk to those
six-year-olds.

She went home and asked her mom---the priest asked them if the last
decade of the Rosary every night could be for the little children in
Africa who don\'t know Jesus.

So she went home and asked her mother, and the mother said, 'No, the
last decade is for the Pope. But it could be the second last decade.'

They began to say the second last decade for the little children in
Africa who didn\'t know Jesus.

God works all sorts of miracles in the souls and the minds of little
children who are watching, who are listening.

We can have great faith in all the things our vocation tells us about
the apostolate of marriage and of the family that we\'re involved in,
how God is using us in a special way at every stage of our existence.

Nothing is lost. We\'re "sowing peace and joy." We\'re creating "bright
and cheerful homes" (J. Escrivá, *Christ Is Passing By*, Points 30, 78).
We\'re creating family fun. We\'re helping people to rediscover the
important things.

Hopefully, little by little, we\'re spreading all those things all over
the world.

I\'m always very moved when here in Kenya, or also in Singapore and in
Manila, people talk about how indebted they are to the education
they\'ve received from their Irish teachers, nuns, and priests.

In Ireland, we don\'t know half the stories, incredible things that have
been done in the last century. An awful lot to be proud of.

All of that started with prayer in the family, with great families,
great mothers and fathers, and maybe grandfathers and grandmothers.

Now that baton has been passed to each one of us.

We can ask Our Lady, that she might help us to focus a little more on
this great goal of quality in family life that Our Lord and our Father
have entrusted to us.

We can say, Mary, Queen of the family, pray for us and pray for our
family apostolate.

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, Saint
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*BWM*
