---
layout: homily
title: "Mental Prayer"
---


By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

There was a mother once who used to go to Mass each day, and she decided
to bring her five-year-old daughter with her. The daughter was there all
throughout the Mass, and she had recently made her First Communion.

When the mother finished Mass, she stayed back to do a few moments of
thanksgiving and the little girl stayed with her. When the mother was
finished, she came out of the church, but the little girl stayed on a
bit longer.

When she eventually came out, the mother was a bit curious, and she
asked her what she had been talking to Jesus about. And the little girl
said, 'I told Jesus that today I\'m going swimming, and if He wants, He
can come and stay inside me, and be a bit like a submarine inside me as
I swim around in the water.'

The mother was very impressed by the simple childlike prayer that her
daughter knew how to say to Jesus, telling Him about the simple,
ordinary things that she was going to do that day.

This meditation is about our mental prayer.

Our mental prayer is meant to be precisely that: the conversation with
Jesus about the ordinary things that we\'re going to do each day, or
that we have done.

There are two types of prayer. There is vocal prayer, and there is
mental prayer.

We tend to know an awful lot about vocal prayer. The vocal comes from
*vox, voces* in Latin, voice. The prayers of the voice---the *Our
Father*, the *Hail Mary*, the Mass, the Rosary---these are all vocal
prayers.

But there\'s another type of prayer which is mental prayer, whereby we
pray with our mind. *Mens, mentis* in Latin means mind. That tends to be
much more personal, much more private. It\'s very intimate.

Vocal prayer is said with many people, and while it has its place, it
can also be a bit anonymous. But there is nothing that will bring your
spiritual life forward faster than a few moments of mental prayer each
day.

"When you pray," said Our Lord, "go into your room and shut the door and
pray to your Father who is in secret; and your Father who sees in secret
will reward you" (Matt. 6:6).

Our Lord invites us to withdraw into the room of our heart frequently.
Shut the door of that room and be alone with Our God in an intimate,
personal, heart-to-heart relationship.

The heart is very important in our faith. There are many times in
Scripture where the heart is emphasized: "Come back to me with all your
heart" (cf. Hos. 14:1). "Rend your heart and not your garments" (Joel
2:13). "I will take out your heart of stone and give you a heart of
flesh" (Ezek. 36:26).

Our Lord tells us we should withdraw into the room of our hearts and
have that intimate, personal relationship with Him. To grow in intimacy
with Jesus we need periods of mental prayer.

Mother Teresa, speaking to a retreat for priests in Rome many years ago,
said to them that we have to have a tender love for Jesus. Very
beautiful words falling from her lips. Really, everything that\'s
written in Scripture about prayer is directed towards that.

"In the morning, long before daybreak, Jesus got up, left the house, and
went off to a lonely place, and there he prayed" (Mark 1:35).

Our Lord was a busy man. He had many things to do. He had to go around
all the towns and villages. He had to instruct many people. Maybe He had
to perform miracles.

But before all that, way before all that, He spends time in prayer. He,
just so long before daybreak, gets up early like a model for the busy
person in the modern world that we live in.

Our Lord gives great primacy to His periods of prayer. He seeks the best
place to talk to His Father God. It\'s as though He\'s very aware that
everything that He\'s going to do this day may depend on that
conversation with His Father God.

Likewise, we have to try and have a schedule: a resolution to spend time
in prayer, but then also a definite schedule. 'I\'m going to do my
mental prayer at this particular time.'

Sometimes I ask people, 'Do you pray during your day?' And sometimes the
answer you get is, 'Yes, Father, when I\'m lying down on my bed at night
and I have one eye open and one eye closed---that\'s when I talk to
Jesus.'

And you sort of feel like saying, 'It won\'t be too long before the
other eyelid closes also.'

If the most important person in the country was coming to see you, you
wouldn\'t tell them to come at 10.30 at night when I\'m lying down on my
bed, and I have one eye open and one eye closed.

You give them the best time of the day. Usually, the best time of the
day when we are more mentally awake is the early morning period.

St. John Damascene defined prayer as "the raising up of the mind and of
the heart to God" (*Catechism of the Catholic Church*, Point 2590). Both
our mind and our heart have to be involved.

If it\'s all mind, then it\'s just thinking or planning. If it\'s all
heart, then it\'s pure sentimentalism. There has to be a balance.

"And he withdrew from them about a stone\'s throw, and kneeling down, he
began to pray. 'Father,' he said, 'if you are willing, take this cup
away from me. Nevertheless, let your will, not mine, be done'" (Luke
22:41-42).

Before everything important, Our Lord spends time in prayer. Even on
that last night before the beginning of the Passion, He separates
Himself. "He withdrew from them, about a stone\'s throw." It's a curious
way of measuring distance.

He indulges Himself then, this period of prayer. He knelt down and said
this powerful prayer: "If you are willing, take this cup away from me."

Our Lord was no masochist. He recoiled away from human suffering in
horror and disgust. He was "like us in all things but sin" (Heb. 4:15).

But then comes the powerful part: "Nevertheless, let your will, not
mine, be done" as though teaching us that it\'s in prayer that we learn
how to accept the will of God, whatever that will may be.

But for all their beauty, these words are not the most important words
in the passage. The most important word is the first word, Father.

There was no contradiction between the fact that God was about to visit
Him with the greatest amount of human suffering that any human person
ever experienced, and the fact that He\'s a loving Father.

Sometimes God may ask us for great sacrifices. But yet we know those
come from the loving hand of Our Heavenly Father. And if He asks us for
great things, it\'s because He wants to give us great things.

"If you, evil as you are, know how to give good gifts to your children,
how much more will your heavenly Father give good things to those who
ask him?" (Matt. 7:11).

"Now it happened in those days he went out onto the mountain to pray,
and he spent the whole night in prayer to God" (Luke 6:12).

Our Lord really emphasizes the point, the importance, of being a soul of
prayer. And so, we can ask Our Lord in this period of prayer that He
might teach us how to pray.

One of the good requests that the apostles made of Our Lord was that.
They got a lot of things wrong, but they got that right. "Lord, teach us
to pray" (Luke 11:1).

They didn\'t say, Teach us how to work miracles. Teach us how to
influence the masses. Teach us how to do all sorts of things. They said,
Teach us how to pray.

Somehow that grace to understand the importance of prayer petered
through into their mind and heart and soul.

We could ask Our Lord for the grace never to lose our concern to be a
more prayerful soul. To give importance to this reality. To spend time,
to have our schedule. To plan our periods of prayer.

Certain topics should pass through our prayer in a regular way: our
family, our humility, our charity, our purity and chastity, our work,
our apostolate.

There may be certain topics that crop up from time to time that we need
to bring to talk to the Master about them, to understand the realities
of these mysteries a little better.

We find our peace in prayer. God has great spiritual consolations to
give us in prayer. Those spiritual consolations can be worth far more
than all the material consolations in the world. "As the deer yearns for
running water, so my soul thirsts for you, my God" (Ps. 42:1).

Pope St. John Paul II liked to say that we all suffer from a hole in the
heart. There is a chasm, he said, in the human heart, and that can only
be filled by God.

God has taken a piece of our heart. He\'s kept it for Himself in heaven.
That\'s why there\'s that hole in our heart. We only get that piece of
our heart back when we go to heaven.

"Our hearts are restless, Lord, until they rest in you" (St. Augustine,
*Confessions*). But when we unite ourselves to Our Lord in prayer, it\'s
as though He gives us back that piece of our heart for a little while.

We can find joy, peace, consolation, meaning, purpose. Pope St. John
Paul II liked to say that the search for meaning in life is the search
for God. In Christ, he said, we find the meaning and the purpose of our
life.

That\'s not just for Catholics, but for every person on the planet.
That\'s as much as to say, "if we don\'t find the meaning and the
purpose of our life in Christ, we don\'t find it anywhere.'

So it makes an awful lot of sense that we might spend time in prayer
every day, talking to the Master, listening to what He has to say to us.

The Holy Spirit breathes prayer into the soul of man, inspires us, gives
us ideas, calms us down---"let not your heart be troubled" (John
14:1)---lets us see things, apostolic horizons, great projects, things
that God wants us to achieve in our apostolic life.

Sometimes Our Lord wants us just to sit and listen to Him.

"In the course of the journey he came to a village, and a woman named
Martha welcomed him into her house. She had a sister called Mary, who
sat down at the Lord\'s feet and listened to him speaking" (Luke
10:38-42).

Initially, you get the impression that Martha is the good one. She\'s
hospitable. She\'s proactive. She\'s, maybe, at the door of her house,
seeing who\'s coming in and out of the village. She welcomes Our Lord.

But then she leaves Him. She goes off to busy herself with all the other
chores that she has to do in the house. She\'s busy, busy, busy, whereas
Mary sits at the Lord\'s feet and listens to His word.

Then Martha comes to complain to Our Lord. "Is it no concern of yours
that my sister has left me to serve alone?" In one sentence, she
mentions herself three to four times.

Our Lord has to speak to her in a sort of a tired voice. "Martha,
Martha."

It\'s about the only time in Scripture that Our Lord speaks like that.
He never says Peter, Peter; John, John; James, James. But He does say,
Martha, Martha, as though to help us to notice what He\'s going to say
next:

"You\'re anxious and troubled about many things, and yet only one thing
is needful. Mary has chosen the best part, and it will not be taken away
from her."

Our Lord doesn\'t say that Mary has more or less chosen well, or she\'s
sort of done okay. No, He leaves us in no doubt. The best---superlative.
"It will not be taken away from her."

He makes it very clear that the one to imitate is Mary. The trouble is
that we\'re all Marthas and we need that conversion to become Marys.
We\'re all anxious and troubled about many things, rushing around the
place, doing things.

We ask Our Lord for that conversion. The engine for that conversion is
mental prayer---to sit down and listen to the Master.

The value of prayer doesn\'t depend on what we feel, but on the love
with which we try to do it. There might be times when Our Lord sends us
great consolation in prayer. We feel in the seventh heaven, on the
clouds.

But there might be times when we get no consolation at all in our
prayer. We might feel dry, arid. One spiritual writer says, If ever you
feel that way in your prayer, persevere in that prayer because that may
be the best prayer that you ever did---because that prayer is all done
for God.

If our prayer is full of human consolations, it might be that we\'re
going there looking for those consolations. But when there\'s no
consolation, then we know it\'s all done for God.

Persevere in that prayer. If we spend time in prayer, it helps us to see
things with a supernatural outlook, which means to see things as God
sees them. And that can bring a great peace.

We seek God in the center of our soul in grace. It helps us to see the
providence of God in the ordinary events of each day.

That leads us to thank Him, to give Him praise; maybe, to say sorry, to
atonement, and we see how He\'s offended with all the sin in the world,
or how we ourselves have offended Him or neglected Him in various ways.

A good way to start the prayer is with a prayer similar to the way we
have started this period of prayer. These meditations are precisely
meant to be periods of prayer.

They\'re not just to talk when you listen. The idea is that you use the
words of the priest to direct them to Our Lord. You do your own prayer
with these words. The priest doesn\'t do your prayer for you.

It\'s a personal relationship. A heart-to-heart relationship. And if you
pray that preparatory prayer well, it\'s like a plane taking off, and in
fact, revving up before the plane starts to go down the runway.

It helps us to get our minds and hearts working in prayer. In those
moments we wholeheartedly turn to God. *My Lord and my God, I firmly
believe that you are here, that you see me, that you hear me.*

A lady stood up at a get-together with Blessed Álvaro del Portillo in
Dublin many years ago. She said, "Father, I have eight children and I
have to look after them. I have to do the cooking and the ironing and
the washing and the cleaning and go to the market and the
supermarket\..."

She went through a whole long list of things that she had to do every
day. She said, "How can I find time in my busy day to fulfill some norms
of a plan of life? Of a spiritual life? A bit of prayer, a bit of
spiritual reading, my rosary, my Mass."

Blessed Alvaro said to her, "The list of things you have to do is very
impressive. It\'s true, you\'re a very busy lady. But," he said,
"you\'ve left something out of your prayer. You\'ve left God out of your
prayer. You've left Him out of your list. Put Him into your list and you
put Him first, and you\'ll find you\'ll have time for all the other
things."

That\'s really the secret. Put our spiritual life first. Get that period
of mental prayer done early in the day. Or that fifteen minutes of
spiritual reading. Or our Mass. Or other spiritual activities that we
try to do.

You\'ll find that God will multiply your time for all the other things.

Try and have a remote preparation for your prayer. It may be that
certain things may strike you as you go through the day, an idea, or
something somebody says.

It would be good to think: 'I need to bring that to my prayer; I need to
talk to God about that thing.' That may be the Holy Spirit speaking to
you.

St. Teresa of Ávila used to say that when she spent time in prayer, the
less God talked to her in prayer; but the more He talked to her in all
the other moments of the day.

If you spend time in mental prayer, you will experience something
similar. You\'ll realize the Holy Spirit is speaking to you through this
person or that person or this event that happens.

St. Paul says to the Romans, "And as well as this, the Spirit too comes
to help us in our weakness, for when we do not know how to pray
properly, then the Spirit personally makes our petitions for us in
groans that cannot be put into words; and he who can see into all our
hearts knows what the Spirit means because the prayers that the Spirit
makes for God\'s holy people are always in accordance with the mind of
God" (Luke 8:26-28).

A good thing to read can be the fourth part of the *Catechism of the
Catholic Church*, which is all about prayer. It\'s a wonderful
compendium of all the most wonderful things that have been said and
written about prayer in the last two thousand years.

It\'s a mysterious but real dialogue with God. It\'s a loving, trusting
conversation. We have to try and turn the whole of our life into prayer.

If you spend time every day in mental prayer, you will find it much
easier to live presence of God during the day. You have little human
reminders that will be like a call to lift up your heart and soul and
mind to God in thanksgiving, in atonement, in praise.

One of the headings in that section on prayer in the *Catechism* talks
about the battle for prayer. It\'s interesting that the Church uses such
a bellicose word, battle for prayer.

It\'s a battle because we have to overcome the things that hold us back:
our laziness and our lack of order.

The devil is very interested that we don\'t spend time in prayer. He
wants to keep us away from that at all costs, because he knows the power
of prayer and how it\'s prayer that brings everything forward.

There\'s another very useful little phrase that Our Lord has given to us
in Scripture, which is, "Unless you...become like little children, you
cannot enter the kingdom of heaven" (Matt. 18:3).

We have to become like little children in our prayer. If ever you are
close to one of your children or your grandchildren, or some small child
that is praying, pay a lot of attention. We can learn a lot from small
children.

A little kid once was saying his night prayers with his mum. He was four
or five years of age and he said, 'God bless mummy and daddy, my
brother, my sister, and everybody else in the family.'

And then, shouting, he said, 'And for Christmas, I want a bicycle.'

The mother said to him, 'You don\'t have to shout. God is not deaf.'

He said, 'No, but Grandma is.'

Little children are very clever. They know how to get what they want.

Our prayer has to be childlike, simple, humble, very aware of who we are
and who He is. We know that God can do everything. He can work all sorts
of miracles.

For all the big things that we may ask Him, sometimes He says yes.
Sometimes He says no. Often He says, Wait, this is not the moment; this
is not the right thing.

If it might seem sometimes that God says no, it\'s not that He\'s not
listening. It\'s just that maybe He wants to give us something better
and He wants us to wait.

There was a little girl who asked Santa Claus for a thousand dolls for
Christmas. Her father was an atheist. She got one doll.

The father said to her, 'Well, your God didn\'t listen to your prayer,
did he?'

And the little girl said, 'Yes, He did. He said no'---she was very
clear---\'God always listens to my prayer. And sometimes, just like you,
who are my father too, He says no. But that doesn\'t mean He doesn\'t
exist.' The clarity of thought of little children.

We are called to pray with a lot of faith. *I firmly believe that you
are here, that you see me, that you hear me.* We remind ourselves in
faith that God is there.

Our prayer is confident, simple. We can ask Our Lord for the grace to
take more advantage of the time that we spend in prayer.

Our Lord says, "Abide in me and I in you" (John 15:4).

Prayer is the language of hope. We go back to God again and again. Every
time He\'s bringing our spiritual life forward, we\'re growing in
intimacy with Him.

In *The Forge*, we\'re told, **"**The spirit of prayer which fills the
entire life of Jesus Christ among men teaches us that all our
actions---great or small---ought to be preceded by prayer, accompanied
by prayer, and followed by prayer" (Josemaría Escrivá, *The Forge*,
Point 441).

We see the primacy that that activity has to have in our day.

St. Teresa of Ávila said, "Prayer is nothing else than a friendly
conversation, very often being alone with the one we know loves us" (St.
Teresa of Ávila, *The Book of Her Life*).

The lover seeks the Beloved (Song 3:2). We can pray anywhere. We can
pray in the middle of a busy street, at a traffic light, in a field.

But we also know that that conversation with Our Lord Jesus Christ is
often best carried out in His presence in front of the tabernacle. Try
to spend at least one period of prayer in front of the tabernacle every
day.

Our Lady is the great teacher of prayer. We can end with that childlike
prayer that says,

*Lovely Lady dressed in blue---*\
*Teach me how to pray!*\
*God was just your little boy,*\
*Tell me what to say!*

*Did you lift Him up, sometimes,*\
*Gently on your knee?*\
*Did you sing to Him the way*\
*Mother does to me?*

*Did you hold His hand at night?*\
*Did you ever try*\
*Telling stories of the world?*\
*O! And did He cry?*

*Do you really think He cares*\
*If I tell Him things---*\
*Little things that happen? And*\
*Do the Angels\' wings*\
*Make a noise?*

*And can He hear me if I speak low?*\
*Does He understand me now?*\
*Tell me---for you know.*

*Lovely Lady, dressed in blue---*\
*Teach me how to pray!*\
*God was just your little boy,*\
*And you know the way.*

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, Saint
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*JOSH*
