---
layout: homily
title: "The Daughter of Jairus"
---


By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

In the Letter of St. Paul to Timothy, he says, "Jesus himself is our
only hope" (*cf*. 1 Tim. 1:1).

But Our Lady is our teacher of hope. Christ is the Supreme Good. The
spirit of Advent largely consists in living close to Our Lady during
this particular time when she is carrying Jesus in her womb.

We could think of the whole of our life as a somewhat longer advent---a
time of waiting for that definitive moment when we will at last find
ourselves with God forever.

The Christian knows that he has to live this advent beside Our Lady
every day of his life if he wants to be certain of attaining the only
thing in the whole of his existence that is really important---finding
Christ in this life, and afterwards being with Him in eternity.

There is no better way of preparing for Christmas, which is now so
close, than by keeping Our Lady company, getting to know her and
deepening our love and trust in her. Mary imparts a great joy to our
souls, because when we turn to her, she leads us to Christ.

In *Friends of God* we are told, "Mary teaches us to hope. She
proclaimed: 'all generations will call me blessed.' Humanly speaking,
how could she hope for such a thing? Who was she, in the eyes of her
contemporaries? The great heroines of the Old Testament---Judith,
Esther, Deborah---won a measure of human renown even here on earth\...

"What a contrast between Our Lady\'s hope and our own impatience! We
call so often upon God to reward us at once for any little good we have
done. For us, no sooner does the very first difficulty appear than we
begin to complain. Often we find ourselves incapable of sustaining our
efforts, of keeping our hope alive" (Josemaría Escrivá, *Friends of
God*, Point 286).

The ones who become discouraged are not those who undergo difficulties
and feel pain. It is those, rather, who do not aspire to sanctity and
eternal life, those who despair of ever reaching them, who buckle and
give up.

The attitude of the former is shaped by a lack of faith, by
comfort-seeking, lukewarmness, an excessive attachment to earthly goods,
which they consider to be the only good things worth having.
Discouragement, if it\'s not remedied, can paralyze any effort to do
good and to overcome difficulties.

Sometimes discouragement over one\'s own failure to advance in sanctity
can come about through a lack of willpower, through fear of the effort
the ascetical struggle entails, and of having to give up disordered
attachments of the senses. Not even apparent failures in our interior
struggle, or in our concern to do apostolate, should be cause for
dismay.

The graces that we ask of God don\'t come like a penny in a slot
machine. Sometimes the fruits of the responses take time to come, but
whoever does things for love of God and for His glory never fails.

We're told in *The Way, "*Convince yourself of this truth: your success
