---
layout: homily
title: "The Good Shepherd"
---

By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

"I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for his
sheep. \... I know my own, and my own know me, just as the Father knows
me and I know the Father; and I lay down my life for the sheep. And
there are other sheep I have that are not of this fold, and I must lead
these too. They too will listen to my voice, and there will be one flock
and one shepherd" (John 10:11, 14-16).

"When he saw the crowds, he felt sorry for them, because they were
harassed and dejected, like sheep without a shepherd" (Matt. 9:36).

One of the most beautiful images that the Church has promoted of Our
Lord is that of the Good Shepherd carrying the little lamb or carrying
the little sheep. We\'re told that the Good Shepherd knows each one of
the sheep by their name (John 10:2).

We\'re told, "When you turn to the right or when you turn to the left,
your ears shall hear a word spoken behind you: 'This is the way, walk in
it'" (Isa. 30:21).

One of the greatest gifts that God can give us in this life is a clearer
view of the road that leads to Him and the opportunity to rely on
someone who will help us to recover from our errors and wrong turnings,
so that we can get back once more onto the right track.

St. Paul, in his writings, on one occasion says, "You run very well but
outside the course" (*cf*. Gal. 5:7).

Many times in the course of their history, the Chosen People lost their
bearings. They strayed from the right path. They fell into great
confusion and dismay, because they had no true guides.

That\'s how God finds His people: like sheep without a shepherd. "When
he saw the crowds, he felt sorry for them, because they were harassed
and dejected, like sheep without a shepherd." Their guides had behaved
more like wolves than like true shepherds of the flock.

Throughout the long waiting of the Old Testament, the prophets had
proclaimed, with centuries still to go, the imminent arrival of the Good
Shepherd, the Messiah, who would lead His flock with loving care. He
would be the "one shepherd" (Ezek. 34:23) who would seek the lost lamb
that had gone astray, who would "bind up its wounds" (Ps. 147.3) and
cure it of its sicknesses.

We can have great confidence in the Good Shepherd, Our loving heavenly
Father, who reaches out to us in all sorts of ways, and who has called
us His children. "Let the little children come unto me" (Matt. 9:14).

He invites us to trust, to trust in all the difficult moments of our
life, when things seem to be going wrong, when there\'s a piece of bad
news; maybe when there\'s a major tragedy, when hearts are breaking,
when there doesn\'t seem to be any human reason, or supernatural reason,
for why certain things have happened; the loss of a loved one at an
early age.

But we know the Good Shepherd is looking after us. And even in those
trying moments, we know that there\'s some other solution, or there\'s
some other plan.

Maybe there\'s some great apostolic plan that God has in mind, behind
these vicissitudes.

I met a priest once who told me that there were three priests in his
family. I think there were eight or ten children. But he told me his
mother had died when the eldest of the children was ten. He said it was
a big blow. And of course, a huge blow.

His father never remarried, but an aunt came in to help take care of the
children. But over time, that family was to produce three vocations.

We don\'t know the plans of God, or what the Good Shepherd is up to.
With Him, the Good Shepherd, the sheep would be safe.

And in His name, they would have other good shepherds, whose mission,
likewise, would be to care for and lead them: "'I will set shepherds
over them who will look after them, and they shall fear no more, nor be
dismayed. Neither shall they be missing,' says the Lord" (Jer. 23:4).

Our Lord says, "I am the good shepherd" (John 10:11). He says, "Come to
me, all you who labor and are heavy burdened, and I will give you rest"
(Matt. 11:28).

Part of our apostolate is in helping other people to discover the Good
Shepherd or leading them to the Good Shepherd. As Philip said to
Nathanael, "Come and see" (John 1:46).

Nathanael, as Bartholomew, never went away again. He became one of the
twelve apostles. He found everything he was looking for.

The Good Shepherd has come into the world to gather God\'s flock
together so that they can find peace in His Sacred Heart.

They can mend their broken hearts. They can find love there because the
Holy Spirit is there.

"For," as St. Peter says, "you were straying like sheep, but have now
returned to the Shepherd and Guardian of your souls" (1 Pet. 2:25).

The Good Shepherd comes to return the lost sheep to its flock (Luke
15:3-7) to guide it (John 10:4), to defend it (Luke 12:32), to feed it
(John 10:9), to judge it (Matt. 25:32), and to lead it finally to the
eternal pastures, "irrigated by \[the\] springs of living water" (Rev.
7:17).

Some soldiers were fighting in a war, World War II, and one of the
soldiers in that group of friends was killed in combat. His friends
wanted to give him a dignified burial so that it would bring comfort to
his grieving mother when the news was given to her.

They found a small cemetery next to a small church and knocked on the
rectory door. The parish priest came out and the soldiers told him about
their dead friend, and asked if he could pray over their friend\'s body,
and if they could bury him in the church cemetery.

The parish priest asked if their soldier friend was Catholic. And they
said, 'No, he wasn\'t.'

So the priest gently explained that their friend could not be buried in
that particular cemetery, but that there was a small wall on one side of
the cemetery, and if they wanted, they could bury their friend outside
that small wall. That was done.

When the war ended, that same group of friends was going home to their
own country. They decided to return to the cemetery to pray at their
comrade\'s grave one last time.

They went to the small wall outside the cemetery, but they couldn\'t
find the grave. They walked around and around. But no grave could be
found.

They knocked on the rectory door. The parish priest came out and the
soldiers explained that they\'d come to pray at their friend\'s grave
one last time before flying home, but they couldn\'t find it.

The priest explained that after they had buried their friend and left,
the priest got to thinking of their kindness in wanting to console the
mother of their dead friend with a dignified prayer burial.

He began to examine his conscience and examine his decisions, and came
to ask himself: If these people were so kind, so affectionate, so tender
with their friend and with his mother, why then was he, the priest, so
rigid?

The priest told them that he had moved the wall so that their friend was
now on holy ground.

The Good Shepherd moves walls. He embraces the lost souls, holds them
close to Him in His embrace. Christ is the Good Shepherd proclaimed by
the prophets. In Him, to the letter, all the prophecies are
accomplished.

He knows each one of His sheep, and calls it by its name (*cf*. John
10:3).

The *Catechism at the Catholic Church* says some very beautiful things
about our name (*Catechism*, Points 2156-2159). Every person has a name.
We\'re given a name at Baptism. Another name at Confirmation. Our names
are very important, because the Good Shepherd knows each person by their
name.

"God will call us by our name." We\'re not given a number. It says the
name of a person "represents their dignity" (*Catechism*, Point 2158).

That\'s why we try to remember people\'s names. It\'s good to call them,
if at all possible, by their Christian name. Young children are very
impressed when older people remember their names. It\'s as though
they're embracing them with a great dignity, affection, and love.

Sometimes it\'s more difficult to remember people\'s names when you get
older, but write them down or try to remember them, as a very beautiful
gesture, a reflection of the dignity owed to the person.

We will have that name for all eternity. Jesus knows us personally. He
calls us, seeks us, heals us.

"If you, evil as you are, know how to give good gifts to your children,
how much more will your heavenly Father give good things to those who
ask him?" (Matt. 7:11).

There\'s no need for us to feel lost or to feel submerged in a huge mass
of nameless humanity. Somebody who may feel alone, or neglected, or
isolated, can always find their peace and their joy in the heart of the
risen Christ.

To Him, each one of us is unique. We can say with perfect accuracy: "He
loved me and gave himself up for me" (Gal. 2:20). He distinguishes my
voice from many others.

It\'s said that a mother always knows the voice of her child. Maternity
is one of the characteristics of Our Father God. No Christian really has
the right to say that they\'re alone, because Christ is always with
them. So is His Mother.

If he or she is lost in the byways of wrongdoing, the Good Shepherd is
already out searching for them.

Only the perverse will of the sheep can bring to nothing the vigilance
of the Shepherd---a plain refusal to return to the sheepfold. That and
that alone.

Christ gives good shepherds to His Church. As well as applying to
Himself the title of Good Shepherd, Christ also compares Himself to the
door through which the sheep enter the fold, which is the Church.

"I am the door of the sheepfold," He says. "I am the gate of the
sheepfold. All who have come before me are thieves and bandits, but the
sheep took no notice of them. I am the gate. Anyone who enters through
me will be safe. Such a one will go in and out and will find pasture.
The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy. I have come so that
they may have life and have it to the full. I am the good shepherd"
(John 10:8-11).

"The Church is a sheepfold whose one and only door is Christ (John
10:1-10). It\'s also a flock, of which God Himself is said in prophecy
to be the shepherd (Isa. 40:11), and whose sheep, though undoubtedly led
by human shepherds, are nevertheless guided and fed continually by
Christ Himself, the Good Shepherd and Prince of shepherds (John 10:11; 1
Pet. 5:4), who gave his life for his sheep (*cf*. John 10:11-15)"
(Vatican II, *Lumen gentium*, Point 6, November 21, 1964).

He speaks to us through His shepherds. That\'s why we have to try and be
attentive to the voice of the Holy Father, to his apostolic exhortations
or encyclicals or pronouncements, or to the voice of our local bishop,
or to the Conference of Bishops.

In the last seventeen years that I\'ve been in Kenya, I\'ve always been
impressed by the pastoral letters of the Kenyan bishops. It\'s a great
service. Over time, they\'ve come to have enormous credibility, like all
bishops have in their countries, because they speak the truth.

From speaking that truth over time comes their great influence. It's a
very good thing to make it our business to know the Pastoral Letters
that come from our bishops.

Our Lord says, "My sheep listen to my voice" (John 10:27). Christ has
ordained that there would be in His Church good shepherds, so that in
His name they may watch over and lead His sheep.

It\'s one of the reasons why St. Josemaría wanted us always to pray
every day for the local bishop, to love him, to ask God for him, to
thank him, to treat him with respect and reverence, because the Holy
Spirit speaks through him.

At the head of all these shepherds is Christ\'s Vicar on earth. He
established Peter and his successors (John 21:15-17), to whom we owe a
special veneration, love, and obedience.

Try and foster in your children a love and reverence for the Holy
Father, so that they may know who the Pope is. Help them to try and see
him on the television or someplace, so they have a sort of a particular
relationship with him; that they don\'t grow up not having any idea of
who the Pope of Rome is.

Together with the Pope, and in communion with him, are all the bishops
to whom we pay similar homage as the successors of the apostles. It\'s a
great role and important to us. It\'s a difficult role to play, a
difficult mission that they have, and we must try and help them fulfill
that mission.

Priests are good shepherds, especially in the administration of the
sacrament of Penance in which all our wounds and illnesses are healed.
We also hear the voice of the Good Shepherd speaking to us, because the
priest is acting in the person of Christ.

"They remind us," said St. John Paul II, "that their priestly
ministry\...is ordered, in a special way, to the great solicitude of the
Good Shepherd, a solicitude for the salvation of all men\..., that men
'may have life and have it more abundantly' (John 10:10), so that no one
may perish (*cf*. John 17:12), but that they may have eternal life"
(John Paul II, *Letter to All Priests*, Point 7, April 8, 1979).

Every Christian also should try and be a good shepherd to their fellow
men, especially by means of fraternal connection, by means of good
example, and prayer.

In particular, a mother and father of a family have a very special role
to play in all of this, to be there for their children, to be available
to them, to be able to give words of encouragement or consolation or
peace in certain moments of trial or contradiction or misunderstanding
or rejection. Very powerful moments.

We can consider that in one way or another, we are all to be the good
shepherds of all the people that God has placed at our side. All those
neighbors, friends, relatives---they\'re all there for a reason, and we
have a duty to help them through example and prayer.

There was a father once who was bringing his children to a playground
and he asked the man at the gate, "What were the charges?" It was a
certain amount for adults, a certain amount for children, and children
under the age of seven years of age were free.

"And what age are your children?" The father said, "Well, they\'re eight
and nine."

The man said, "You know, if you told me that they were seven or six, I
wouldn\'t have known the difference."

The father replied, "The children would have known the difference. They
would have known that I was telling a lie, an untruth."

Certain moments are served up to us by life to give witness to the truth
to the people that have been entrusted to us to be formed. They may come
like the thief in the night, but they may be very important moments,
because our children see to what extent we\'re willing to live by the
truth, to what extent that we don\'t allow any little lies in our life.

We are there to give them our good example to walk in the ways of
holiness and to persevere in our correspondence to the gifts and
indications of the Good Shepherd, who is leading us to the pastures of
eternal life.

"The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want. Near restful waters, he
leads me to revive my drooping spirit" (Ps. 23:1-2).

There was a teacher once in the class who loved to read that psalm. One
day, she invited some children to see if they now---they\'d heard it so
many times---might be able to repeat the psalm. "The Lord is my
shepherd, there is nothing I shall want." Or even if they could repeat a
verse.

She invited volunteers to come to the front of the class. One little
four-year-old went up and began to recite, "The Lord is my shepherd,
that is all that I want." And she sat down.

Like little children, we try to learn these things as best we can.

The role of the good shepherd is a most demanding one, because sometimes
to give that good example---in traffic, in a difficult moment, or an
irritated moment---it can be very trying, and demanding, to say the
right thing, to do the right thing. But maybe our passions are screaming
at us to do the wrong thing.

Being that good shepherd can involve a lot of love and a great deal of
patience.

Perhaps with older grown-up children, you may think they're taking a
left turn, and you\'d love to give them a lecture. But you know deep
down that a great good may come from just keeping our big mouths shut
and relying more on supernatural means.

All this requires courage, ability, meekness, as well as, often, the
quickness of mind, and a great sense of responsibility, to instill peace
in a difficult interaction or conversation with friends or relatives, to
smoothen things over.

The neglect of this mission can bring about serious harm to the people
of God (Jer. 50:6-8). "The bad shepherd leads even his strongest sheep
to their death" (St. Augustine, *Sermon 46*).

It\'s not difficult to be a bad shepherd. There may be many people
around us, and we think they\'re not as good a shepherd as they might
be.

"The good shepherd has to fulfill four conditions. First of all, he must
have love. Charity is the very first virtue Our Lord demanded of Peter
before entrusting to him the care of his flock" (St. Thomas of
Villanueva, *Sermon on the Gospel of the Good Shepherd*).

"Simon, do you love me more than these?" "Yes, Lord, you know that I
love you." "Feed my lambs" (John 21:15).

"Secondly, the good shepherd must be watchful, so that he may be
attentive to the needs of his flock," to bring the sheep around us to
our prayer, to count the sheep. What do the people around me really
need? How can I be all things to all men in this particular situation?
The different members of my family may need different words, different
affection, different encouragement, different thinking, to lead them
forward to the next stage of their human, spiritual, doctrinal, and
apostolic development.

One of the words Our Lord says frequently in Scripture is the word
"watch." Be vigilant. Bring things to your prayer. Look out for telltale
signs that something may be going wrong.

"Essential in the third place is doctrine," right ideas, "the aim of
which is to provide men with the food that will enable them to reach
salvation" (*ibid*.).

One time in Singapore, shortly after the new *Catechism of the Catholic
Chur*ch had been published, which was essentially, and first and
foremost, like all major documents of the Church, addressed to bishops,
I saw the local archbishop going out to say Mass with the new
*Catechism* under his arm.

He was going to preach a homily based on the new *Catechism* and wanted
people to see it. It looked very well under his arm, because one of the
main roles of bishops is to teach---to teach the truth, to be witnesses
to the truth, to communicate doctrine.

Each one of us has a role in that as the good shepherd---to know our
doctrine; and to grow in our formation, which never ends; to know how to
explain the ideas, the truths that we have, so that, as St. Peter says,
we can "give other people around us the reason for the hope that is in
us" (*cf*. 1 Pet. 3:15).

Doctrine brings light, which brings life. Doctrine is reflected in the
life that we lead. We give witness to the truths that are in us.

"Finally, the Good Shepherd requires holiness and integrity in life,
which is the foundation of all these qualities" (*ibid*.).

That\'s why we need ongoing formation to grow in holiness, to learn how
to lead integrity of life, so that we don\'t have a double life, so that
we\'re not saying one thing and living by something else, so that we
give that witness of authenticity, which is very attractive, which other
people see.

It's the duty of us all to plead persistently also that there will never
be a lack of good shepherds in the Church. St. Josemaría, when he was
alive, used to say that we have to pray very much for the next Pope. It
leads us to pray very much for the next Bishop.

God wants us to be vigilant in that way, to prepare the way. We have to
pray particularly for those whom God has made the shepherds of our own
souls.

After receiving the sacrament of Penance, it can be a very good idea to
repeat the penance you were given for the sanctity of the priest who
heard your Confession. It\'s a concrete way each week to pray for
priests.

We also encounter the good shepherd in spiritual direction. Each one of
us needs a good shepherd to direct our soul because no one can be their
own good shepherd or their own director. No one can map out their own
course without a special help from God.

"My sheep listen to my voice." We know that the Holy Spirit will speak
to us through those specific persons that God has placed in our life to
guide us.

If we try and guide ourselves, there can be a great lack of objectivity.
We can have a great exaggerated love for our own selves, and laziness.
All these can conspire to obscure our path to God, leading us to a
certain spiritual stagnation, lukewarmness, and discouragement.

On the other hand, in the same way that a ship with a good pilot arrives
safely in port, so also will the soul that has a good shepherd safely
reach its destination even though it may have gone astray many times.

Everyone knows that a guide is needed in order to climb a mountain
without difficulty. Anybody in any human, let alone supernatural,
endeavor, needs some sort of a guide. Every team in the Premier League
has a coach. Every successful athlete in the Olympics has a coach to
whom they have to listen very carefully.

The same thing happens when it\'s a matter of a spiritual climb; and
even more so if there are certain pitfalls that may be set there by the
devil who dearly wants to bring us down.

We need spiritual direction so that at the end of our lives we\'ll not
have to say what the Israelites said after wandering about the desert
without direction or meaningful purpose: "For forty years, we went round
and round the mountain" (*cf*. Num. 14:33-34, Deut. 2:1-3).

We have lived, they said, without rhyme or reason, without knowing where
we were going, without our work or study bringing us any closer to God,
without letting friendship or family, health or sickness, success or
failure take us one step forward towards what is really important:
holiness and salvation.

There are an awful lot of people in this world who don\'t know where
they\'ve come from, where they\'re going, what their life is all about.

John Paul II says it\'s one clear question that every human person must
ask themselves frequently: Where have I come from? Where am I going?
What is my life all about? (*cf*. John Paul II, Encyclical, *Fides et
Ratio*, Point 1, September 14, 1988).

So that we won\'t be in a position of having to say one day that we too
have lived in this way, pointlessly whiling away the time, absorbed in
passing fancies, simply because we have no supernatural goal to aim at,
we need a clear path to travel and a guide to lead us along that path.

It may be necessary to entrust the direction of our soul to someone
else, for we all need a kindly push if we get discouraged or have
setbacks on our road to God.

It\'s well known that every pope in history has had a confessor, a
spiritual director, someone to whom he entrusts his soul. Every person
on the planet needs such a person.

We all need that friendly voice that will say, 'Come on! Don\'t give in!
God\'s grace is available for you, to help you overcome every
difficulty.'

Listen to these words inspired by the Holy Spirit: "For if they fall,
one will lift up his fellow; but woe to him who is alone when he falls
and does not have another to lift him up" (Eccles. 4:10).

With the help of our spiritual director, we regain our interior
composure. We draw upon forces which we had thought were not there
anymore. We continue on our way. It\'s never too late.

It\'s a special grace from God to be able to rely on such a person who
is both a friend and confidant and who can help us so effectively in a
matter of such great importance.

Choose your spiritual director carefully: a man of prayer, of holiness,
of discretion, of prudence. And to that person, we can open our hearts
confidently, with human and supernatural intent.

It\'s a great joy, very often, to be able to lay bare our most intimate
thoughts and feelings, to direct them to God with the help of someone
who understands us, who won\'t get shocked or scandalized when they hear
the thoughts that can pass through the head of a human person, who
won\'t call the police.

That person holds us in esteem, opens up to us new horizons, supports
us, prays for us, understands us.

That person has a special grace from God to enable him to help us, to
seek those special lights from the Holy Spirit, to see, What does this
particular soul need in this particular moment? That person has the
grace of state to help him fulfill his mission.

It's important for us to go and find that person who can truly be a good
shepherd for us, the one that God wants us to go to. If there\'s such a
priest or layperson near you that God has somehow led you to, you can be
sure that\'s the person God wants for you.

St. Luke tells us how the prodigal son felt the need to be rid of the
burden that weighed so heavily on his soul. Judas also felt weighed down
by the load of his betrayal.

The prodigal son went where he ought to have gone and found a peace that
he could never have imagined. He regained his life. He was welcomed back
into the family, into the house of his Father God (Luke 15:11-32).

Judas should have gone back to Jesus, who would have sheltered and
comforted him in spite of his sin, just as he did with the repentant
Peter. But instead, Judas went where he should not have gone: he went to
those who were incapable of understanding, and, above all, who were
unable to give him what he most needed. "'What is that to us?' they said
to him. 'See to it yourself'" (Matt. 27:3-4).

In spiritual direction, we encounter the Good Shepherd, who each week
may just say a word, a phrase, a bit of encouragement, but often that\'s
enough to help us to start over. He gives us the help we need to avoid
getting lost and to get back on the right path if we have deviated from
it in our progress toward Christ.

We know that Our Holy Mother Mary will always show us the safe path that
will lead to her Son.

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, Saint
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*EW*
