---
layout: homily
title: "Piety"
---

By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

"Now as they went on their way, Jesus entered a village. And a woman
named Martha received him into her house. And she had a sister called
Mary, who sat at the Lord\'s feet and listened to his teaching. But
Martha was distracted with much serving. And she went to him and said,
'Lord, do you not care that my sister has left me to serve alone? Tell
her, therefore, to help me.' But the Lord answered her, 'Martha, Martha,
you are anxious and troubled about many things. One thing is needful.
Mary has chosen the better part, which shall not be taken away from
her'" (Luke 10:38-42).

In the modern world, "piety" has come to be associated with being
religious. And while it does have a religious application, its original
meaning was far wider and richer.

The English word "piety" comes from the Latin *pietas*, which spoke of
family love, and by extension, respect for one\'s ancestors, for one\'s
country, and for God.

Cicero defined *pietas* as the virtue "which admonishes us to do our
duty to our country, or our parents, or our blood relations."

For the ancient Romans, piety was one of the highest virtues since it
was the virtue that knit families, and ultimately all of society,
together in love, loyalty, and a shared, reciprocal duty.

Piety also roots us in our past and helps us to give proper respect to
those who have gone before us.

You could say that piety is the glue that holds us together. Without its
effects, we can fall apart into factions, our families can dissolve, and
the "weave" of our culture can give way to tear and to dry rot.

It\'s the just recognition that we owe to those who have gone before us.
It\'s the sober realization that we owe our existence and our substance
to powers beyond ourselves.

We are social, communal beings. We\'re not islands; we\'re part of the
mainland.

Piety is a gift of the Holy Spirit that comes through the sacraments.

It is "not identified with having compassion for someone or having pity
for our neighbor; but it indicates our belonging to God and our profound
bond with Him, a bond that gives meaning to the whole of our life, which
keeps us firm in communion with Him, even during the most difficult and
trying moments" (Pope Francis, *General Audience*, June 4, 2014).

The virtue of piety and the gift of piety are very important things.
We\'re called to practice the virtue of piety frequently, to take care
of our piety, to form children in piety.

"It is our friendship with God, given us by Our Lord, a friendship that
changes our life and fills us with enthusiasm and joy" (*Ibid*.).

The gift of piety poured into our souls by the Holy Spirit arouses in
us, first of all, gratitude and praise, leads us to thank God and to
praise Him.

It teaches us the meaning of our divine filiation, that we are children
of God. It's a joyful supernatural awareness that we have: children of
God and brothers and sisters of all mankind.

It also moves us to maintain an attitude of childlike intimacy with God.
"Unless you become like little children, you cannot enter the kingdom of
heaven" (Matt. 18:3).

The Founder of Opus Dei used to say we have to try and have "the piety
of children and the doctrine of theologians" (Josemaría Escrivá, *Christ
Is Passing By*, Point 10). Doctrinal piety is necessary.

The gift of piety means we\'re truly capable of rejoicing with those in
joy, and to weep with those who weep, and to welcome and help those who
are in need.

"When the Holy Spirit makes us perceive the presence of the Lord and all
his love for us, it warms our hearts, and moves us almost naturally to
prayer and celebration. Piety, therefore, is synonymous with authentic
religious spirit, with filial confidence and trust in God, with that
capacity to pray to him with the love and simplicity which is proper to
persons who are humble of heart. ... May the Holy Spirit give all of us
this gift of piety" (Pope Francis, *General Audience*, June 4, 2014).

It\'s something we need to foster in our families. Often, I think that
the prayers that a child knows at the time of their First Communion will
be the prayers they say on their deathbed. The early years of life are
often the best years for formation and piety. We shouldn\'t waste those
years.

John Paul II liked to say that we go to the great spiritual messages
through physical signs and symbols. Very often little children take in
those physical signs and symbols.

They see them, they hear them: beautiful singing in church, different
liturgical celebrations, Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament,
ashes---all the other material things that are part of our piety: holy
water, crucifixes, Rosary, Way of the Cross. It\'s very good to expose
children to all these things at a young age.

St. Josemaría in *The Forge* says. "You must be constant and demanding
with yourself in your regular practices of piety, even when you feel
tired and arid. Persevere! Those moments are like the tall red-painted
poles which serve as markers along the mountain roads when there are
heavy snowfalls. They are always there to show where it is safe to go"
(J. Escrivá, *The Forge*, Point 81).

He also says, "Interior life is strengthened by a daily struggle in your
practices of piety, which you should fulfill---or rather which you
should live!---lovingly, because the path we travel as children of God
is a path of love" (*Ibid*., Point 83).

Adoration and prayer are the principal acts of the virtue of religion.
They\'re also natural obligations.

Through the virtue of piety, we learn almost instinctively that we
cannot get through life without prayer any more than we can survive
without food.

St. Thomas Aquinas says, "Prayer is proper to the rational creature,
because only a creature with an intellect can realize that he\'s
dependent on God" (Thomas Aquinas, *Summa Theologiae*, II. II. Question
83). Animals don\'t pray.

Pope John Paul said, "Prayer is...the acknowledgment of our limits and
dependence: we come from God, we exist in God, and to God we return"
(John Paul II, *Address to Young People*, March 14, 1979).

\"Hence, we cannot but abandon ourselves to him, our Creator and Lord,
with full and complete confidence. ... Prayer is above all an act of the
intellect, a sense of humility and gratitude, an attitude of trust and
abandonment in him who has given his life for love of us" (*Ibid*).

"Silence and contemplation have a purpose: they serve, in the
distractions of daily life, to preserve permanent union with God" (Pope
Benedict XVI, *Homily*, October 6, 2006).

No matter what we\'re doing or where we are, we can express our life of
piety through the presence of God, through acts of faith, acts of hope,
acts of thanksgiving, acts of atonement, living in God\'s presence, and
communicating with Him all the time.

Piety leads us to want to be formed and to take advantage of all the
means of formation that God has made available to us, which, when you
think about it, are treasures. Great gifts.

Superficiality is not Christian. We need to stir up our interest to know
God through reading, through classes, through prayer, through getting to
know His life, through coming to understand the workings of His Heart,
so that we don\'t get carried away by sentimentalism or superficiality.
We should have great desires to grow in this area.

Knowing more about God but not loving Him more is not so useful. The
goal of our interior life is not just to know God, not just to know
theology, but to love Him in practical ways.

That\'s why all the saints say that somebody who may know very little
theology but is full of piety---they may know an awful lot about God,
far more about God than many theologians.

St. Josemaría says in *The Forge*, "With your life of piety you will
learn how to practice the virtues befitting your condition as a child of
God, as a Christian. ---And together with those virtues, you will
acquire a whole range of spiritual values which seem small but are
really very great.

"They\'re like shining precious stones, and we must gather them along
the way and then take them up to the foot of God\'s Throne in the
service of our fellow men: simplicity, cheerfulness, loyalty, peace,
small renunciations, little services which pass unnoticed, the faithful
fulfillment of duty, kindness..." (J. Escrivá, *The Forge*, Point 86).

While we try to grow in piety, at the same time we try to avoid what you
would call pietism, a sort of excessive piety that is without doctrine,
so that we get things a bit mixed up.

We feel we have to have many medals instead of just one. Or thinking
that to get my house blessed is more important than going to Mass on
Sundays.

I heard someone say once that our doctrinal formation prevents us from
becoming what somebody called once "pious nuts." Sometimes pious nuts
can give a bad impression of religion.

We need a balanced piety, or why we know the reason for our actions.
This leads us to avoid anything unusual or odd. Our doctrine keeps us
very balanced, very normal.

But at the same time, if we\'re to love God, we need to try and know Him
as much as possible. If we try to get most out of the means of
formation, a very good disposition for that is piety.

We\'re told in *The Forge*, "You need interior life and doctrinal
formation. Be demanding on yourself! As a Christian man or woman, you
have to be the salt of the earth and the light of the world, for you are
obliged to give good example with your holy shamelessness.

"The charity of Christ should compel you. Feeling and knowing yourself
to be another Christ from the moment you told him that you would follow
him, you must not separate yourself from your equals---your relatives,
friends and colleagues---any more than you would separate salt from the
food it is seasoning.

"Your interior life and your formation include the piety and the
principles a child of God must have in order to give flavor to
everything by his active presence there. Ask the Lord that you may
always be that good seasoning in the lives of others" (J. Escrivá, *The
Forge*, Point 450).

St. Paul in the Acts of the Apostles tells us a lot about his life, his
human qualities. He wasn\'t timid. He was cultured. He was a good
speaker. He had the capacity to persuade. He knew the Roman laws. He was
well-formed in Scripture and Jewish customs. He studied at the school of
Gamaliel.

Before his conversion, all these good qualities helped him to persecute
Christians, assisting at the martyrdom of Stephen, the imprisonment of
Christians who rightly feared him.

But then at his conversion, there\'s a dialogue with Our Lord. He opens
to grace. The scales fall from his eyes, which prevented him from seeing
the truth.

All the intellectual, professional, doctrinal formation is useless
unless there are personal dealings with Our Lord through piety---a
sincere piety that\'s not just external actions. We don\'t just go
through the Rosary or the Way of the Cross, which are all very good,
without penetrating to their deepest meaning.

"Nevertheless," said Pope John Paul II, "the temptation towards the
opposite is currently very prevalent---the kind of arrogance that leads
man to fail to recognize that he is a creature and therefore inherently
dependent on another.

"Contemporary man, especially, has fallen prey to this illusion. Child
of the modern pretensions to autonomy, and dazzled by his own splendor,
by his wondrous fashioning, he forgets that he\'s a creature.

"As the Bible teaches us, he suffers the temptation to set himself up
against God, following the serpent's insidious suggestion in the Garden
of Eden: 'You will be like God' (Gen. 3:5).

"The consequences," he continues, "of this pretense to autonomy are
disastrous for man, since, when he fails to acknowledge his dependence
on God, he inevitably ends up going astray. His heart claims to be the
sole measure of reality. His will no longer recognizes the law inscribed
in his heart by his Creator.

"And he ceases to pursue the good. Seeing himself as the final arbiter
of both truth and error, he imagines these to be equally elusive and
thus deceives himself. In this way, the spiritual dimension of reality
fades from his experience. And as a result, his ability to discern what
is mystery as well."

We can ask the Holy Spirit for a greater gift of this piety, a piety
that is manifested also in the liturgy.

We can love the liturgy and have certain manifestations of liturgical
piety, a sincere interior attitude that gets expressed in acts of faith
and of love, respecting the liturgical norms.

"Love Our Lord very much," we\'re told in *The Forge*. "Maintain and
foster in your soul a sense of urgency to love him better. Love God
precisely now when perhaps a good many of those who hold him in their
hands do not love him, but rather ill-treat him and neglect him. Be sure
to take good care of the Lord for me, in the Holy Mass and throughout
the whole day" (J. Escrivá, *The Forge*, Point 438).

We can make our genuflection with piety, with a certain pause and
attention, so that if someone sees us making a genuflection, they\'re
able to see, 'here is a person of faith.'

St. Edith Stein talks about how before her conversion as a Jewess, a
philosopher in Nazi Germany, her only prayer was the search for truth.
One day she went into a Catholic church---she\'d never been inside a
Catholic church before---just to see what it was like.

While she was there, a lady came along with her shopping basket, coming
from the market. The lady knelt down and said a prayer before Our Lord
and Blessed Sacrament.

This very simple, normal, common act of piety that many Catholics
practice had a profound effect on Edith Stein, who went on to be St.
Teresa Benedict of the Cross, martyred at Auschwitz, because she said no
Jewess in her right mind would pass by the synagogue to kneel down and
say a prayer.

It was the simple piety of this mother of a family, going about her
ordinary duties, expressing her faith in such a simple way, that had a
powerful effect on this future saint and model for all Christians.

We don\'t know how God is using our piety to inculcate piety in others.
With your family, try to use occasions to pray with them, to say the
Morning Offering perhaps at the breakfast table or in the car, or to
pray the Prayer to the Guardian Angel, or to say a decade of the Rosary,
or to link up a little visit to the Blessed Sacrament when you go
shopping or go to town for certain things---so that people see that our
faith is very much part of our life.

If you have any situation in your parish or in other stations upcountry
where you have a chance to improve the material care of the liturgical
items, try and do so, so that the items that are used in the Mass are
good, the Missals, the linens, the sacred vessels---that they\'re clean,
that they\'re dignified, in good condition.

Let the splendor of the divine realities shine, of tasteful liturgical
objects, because in one of those parishes or outstations or remote
places where the Mass is said, even if it\'s on the back of a truck or
back of a pickup some place, there may be some future vocation.

Those liturgical items may be the objects that God used when to enter
the mind, heart, and ears of that child, to form them in liturgical
piety.

It\'s very good that we have a certain finesse in piety. There\'s a
thing called liturgical good manners. We don\'t talk in church. We take
care of moments of silence. We create that atmosphere of prayer. We try
to foster love of God in small details, little sacrifices.

It\'s good that we try to be refined in the fulfillment of our practices
of piety: our Morning Offering, our Grace Before Meals, our visits to
the Blessed Sacrament, our glances at the images of Our Lady.

We\'re told in the *Furrow*, "You need a heart which is in love, not an
easy life, to achieve happiness" (J. Escrivá, *Furrow*, Point 795). A
heart that is in love with God, and that love finds expression in
concrete details every day.

The virtue of piety, which is indispensable to justice, will also lead a
person to give due honor and reverence to the legitimately constituted
authority---first of all, to our parents, as part of the Fourth
Commandment.

But that includes all lawful authority. St. Paul says, "Let everyone be
subject to the higher authorities, for there exists no authority except
from God, and those who exist have been appointed by God. Therefore, he
who resists the authority resists what God has appointed" (Rom. 13:1-2).

That\'s another interesting little area in which to educate our
children.

Also, man\'s social makeup brings him to have closer ties to a wider
community than just the family. It\'s from that wider community that we
receive language, culture, traditions.

Patriotism also forms part of the virtue of piety. Love for one\'s
village, or love for one\'s town, or one\'s city, or one\'s region, or
one\'s country.

Patriotism is distinct from nationalism. Patriotism is a healthy love
for all those things we\'ve just mentioned. This leads us to love other
countries also, because God has made them; and other towns and cities
and regions, because they all come from God.

In *The Way*, St. Josemaría says, "So many glories of France are glories
of mine!" (J. Escrivá, *The Way*, Point 525). He was from Spain, from a
different country.

Patriotism leads us to love our own country, but also to love other
countries as well, and to recognize the great achievements of other
peoples or other places, so that we\'re not just super attached to our
little town with the blinkers on.

Nationalism is a type of love of my own place, my own country, to the
detriment of other people or other countries. That type of nationalism
has led to many wars.

Every time we receive grace in the sacraments, we receive all the gifts
of the Holy Spirit. That\'s a treasure that we receive every time. We
are spiritual millionaires.

Every time we go to the sacraments, we can ask the Holy Spirit for all
of His gifts: wisdom, understanding, counsel, knowledge, piety,
fortitude, and fear of the Lord.

Pope St. John Paul liked to say that the family is a school of piety, a
school of love, a school of virtue, a school for the soul (*Familiaris
Consortio*); a school of deeper humanity (quoting *Gaudium et Spes*); a
sanctuary of life (*Evangeliium Vitae).*

He said, "The future of humanity passes through the family" (John Paul
II, Apostolic Exhortation, *Familiaris Consortio*, November 22, 1981).

Children shouldn\'t just learn prayers at school. The home is the first
educator. Often all the great moral lessons that a child has to learn
are learned before they\'re seven years of age.

I often think if you hear of people who in some countries have embezzled
large amounts of money from some bank, some major senior professional
person, that person did not learn "Thou shalt not steal" before they
were seven years of age.

This is another reason to pay great attention to the preparation of
children for their First Holy Communion, so that they know their
prayers, they know the moral lessons, they know the Ten
Commandments---and with that, an awareness that the great spiritual
messages often come through material things---dressed in white for our
First Communion.

Possibly the child doesn\'t grasp the deep spiritual and theological
significance of the Real Presence of Our Lord. But through the clothing
that they wear---dressed in white---they get some sense that something
very important is happening here.

We encounter the spiritual realities through those physical signs and
symbols (*Catechism of* *the Catholic Church*, Point 1146).

Make every opportunity that Christmas and Easter provide for teaching
spiritual truths: the Way of the Cross during Lent, or the crib at
Christmas. Or other such things, maybe a May altar in May, or the rosary
in October, or a visit to a certain shrine of Our Lady in the month of
May.

Another good thing can be to bring your family occasionally to different
churches in different parts of the city, so that somehow, they come to
appreciate the universality of the Church. They get to know a little bit
how other parishes and other chapels and churches function.

It\'s good if children can hear various prayers that they might not hear
under other circumstances, like the *Memorare*. Or to wear a medal from
when they're young, as a protection of Our Lady.

And of course, giving importance to Sunday Mass. It comes before
everything, before any journey, especially when we\'re out of town. If
we\'re traveling internationally, we\'ll try and find out the times of
the Masses in the places we\'re staying, before we leave.

Or if possible, to celebrate feast days of Our Lady or other big feasts
of the Church with some little family treat, so that children learn to
Christianize these things. They remember the feast days.

Give importance to Pentecost, not just to Christmas and Easter. Often
children know a lot about Christmas and Easter, but very little about
Pentecost.

Try and do a visit to the poor as a family regularly, a few times a
year.

Make visits to the Blessed Sacrament and your local church compatible
with visits to the bank or the supermarket. Make sure that children know
the national shrines to Our Lady or other small local shrines.

Teach them about indulgences. Visit a cemetery, a place where your
parents or grandparents are buried, so they learn to pray for the dead.

Promote a Catholic culture, so they have a certain knowledge of mission
territories. Pray at home for the Pope and his intentions, so that
little children learn who the Pope is.

There\'s a whole pile of little ways that we can inculcate piety in
children.

Children believe what they see and hear. If you go to Confession
regularly, occasionally go with your children. Let them see you going to
Confession. They see this as not something that they do.

Help them to pray their night prayers and their morning prayers.

Above all, help them to realize that Our Lady is always in our midst.

If you have little images of Our Lady in your home or your bedroom, the
children can learn to say their prayers before that image, or to turn to
Our Lady to say something nice before they go to bed at night, or when
they wake up in the morning.

We could ask Our Lady that we might grow in this virtue of piety, and in
this year of St. Joseph in particular, to pass our piety through St.
Joseph. He must have had a great love for Our Lady and the Child Jesus.

Mary, may you nudge St. Joseph and ask him to teach us to grow in this
virtue in a special way during this coming year.

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, Saint
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*JOSH*
