---
layout: homily
title: "Comforter of the Afflicted"
---


By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

"As soon as the sound of your greeting reached my ears, the babe in my
womb leapt for joy" (Luke 1:44), so said St. Elizabeth when Our Lady
visited her.

Throughout her life, Our Lady must have been a great source of
consolation, joy, and support to anyone with a weight that may have felt
too heavy to bear alone.

On that night in Bethlehem, when St. Joseph explained the pressing need
for lodging, going door to door to one house after another, and he found
that no door would open to them, Our Lady must have given St. Joseph
words of encouragement (cf. Luke 2:7).

One smile from Our Lady would have been enough for St. Joseph to find
the strength to go and make the most of whatever he had found---a stable
on the outskirts of the little town.

On the flight into Egypt, she would have been a tower of strength for
him and helped him to set up things again in that country (cf. Matt.
2:13-15).

Joseph himself was a man of fortitude, but it would have been easier for
him to do what he must do to fulfill the Will of God when he was
sustained by the encouragement of Our Lady.

Her neighbors in Nazareth must have always found encouragement,
upliftment, and understanding in her words.

The apostles found refuge in her company, particularly when everything
turned dark and meaningless after the death of Christ on the Cross. They
were united in prayer with Mary, the Mother of Jesus (cf. Acts 1:13-14).

When they returned from placing the Body of Our Lord in the sepulcher,
at a time when families in Jerusalem were getting ready to celebrate the
Paschal feast, those very apostles, who had fled numb with shock and
disoriented, must have turned automatically to Our Lady.

From then on, she has never ceased to comfort those who are oppressed by
sorrow, loneliness, or suffering---particularly those who may have a
broken heart.

This world is full of broken hearts, and Our Lady allowed her own heart
to be pierced by a sword, a spiritual sword, on the Cross (cf. Luke
2:34-35).

God willed it that way so that she could always be a refuge for all
time, for everybody in the world who might be suffering from a broken
heart, or who knows somebody who has one.

"She has shielded innumerable Christians from persecution, freed many
souls possessed by the devil or besieged by temptations, saved countless
peoples imperiled from anxiety. She has strengthened and helped many of
the dying by reminding them as they lay on their deathbeds of the
infinite merits of her Son" (Réginald Garrigou-Lagrange, *The Mother of
the Saviour*).

If ever our life becomes a bit of a misery, or we're overwhelmed by
apparently insoluble difficulties, or crushed by illness, or daunted by
seeming failure in our dedication to an apostolic task, or we're
threatened by discouragement in the effort of bringing up our family, or
dismayed at the obstacles that just keep piling up---then we can turn to
Our Lady, *Comforter of the Afflicted*.

We know that we will always find encouragement and strength to fulfill
the lovable Will of her Son. We can say to her slowly, "Hail, Holy
Queen, Mother of mercy, hail, our life, our sweetness, and our hope."
Blessed Álvaro del Portillo liked to point out that with Our Lady, how
sweet everything is.

From her, we will learn how to console and hearten others in their
struggle. We will be compassionate and reach out to those who are in
need of our help---people who may be in situations of disaster or in
minor worries.

We will know how to give a word of encouragement here, a word of
condolence there, with a merciful attitude that is so pleasing to Our
Lord.

Our Lady is Comforter of the Afflicted because, first of all, we favor
those that we love, and nobody has had a greater love than Our Lady for
those who belong to the family of her Son. In her we can find every
grace that we need to win through in the fight against temptation, in
our apostolate, and in our work.

She will remind us that in the Rosary we have a powerful weapon with
which to overcome all the obstacles that we may meet along the way.

Following the constant teachings of the Roman Pontiffs, many Christians
throughout the world have made the daily Rosary a part of their life of
piety. They often recite it as a family prayer, or alone in a church,
while walking along the street, or travelling in some form of transport.

The Book of Ecclesiasticus (Sirach) says, "In me is to be found every
grace of doctrine and of truth, every hope of life and of virtue"
(Ecclus. 24:25).

In *Friends of God*, St. Josemaría says. "How wise the Church has been
to put these words on Our Mother\'s lips so that we Christians do not
forget them. She is our safety, the love that never fails, the refuge
ever open to us, the hand ever ready to caress and console" (Josemaría
Escrivá, *Friends of God*, Point 279).

n the Psalms we pray, "I lift up my eyes to the mountains, from where
shall come my help? My help shall come from the Lord, who made heaven
and earth" (Ps. 121:1-2).

Very often that pathway that Our Lord gives to us to find that help is
in Our Lady. She is always there for us. She will always listen to the
petitions that we make to her.

She wants us to be persevering in prayer, like that tireless widow in
the Gospel. The widow never stopped asking and banging on the door.

And after many refusals to hear her case, the unjust judge finally
relents. And so, the weaker party has triumphed.

The reason for the victory of that poor widow does not lie in any
conversion on the judge\'s part. The widow has just worn down the
defenses of the judge to the point of his capitulation by not giving up
(cf. Luke 18:1-6).

Our Lord in that parable concludes by saying, "Now will not God see
justice done to those who cry to him day and night, even when he delays
to help them?" (Luke 18:7).

God, who is full of mercy, awaits our steadfast prayer. Our Lady must be
waiting for something similar. She wants us to really want the things
that we ask for.

Until the end of time, the Church will offer up constant supplication to
God the Father through Jesus Christ in the unity of the Holy Spirit, and
through Mary.

The Church prays for all the needs of her children. It is the primary
responsibility of the Church and the first duty of her priests.

That's the most important thing that each one of us can accomplish
because we too are defenseless like the widow in the parable.

At the conclusion of that parable, Our Lord says, "When the Son of Man
comes, will he find any faith on earth?" (Luke 18:8).

Will the Lord find faith as unswerving as that of that insistent widow?
She has the faith of the children of God who believe in the goodness and
power of their Father in heaven.

Man may come to shut God out of his life. He might not feel the need for
God anymore. He might seek reasons and solutions to the problems in
life, to which only Our Lord can provide satisfactory answers. Such as
these will never find the good things, the truths, which are
indispensable.

But Our Lady has told us: "He has looked upon the lowliness of his
handmaid...he has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he
has sent empty away" (Lk. 1:48, 53).

Our Lady teaches us to go to Our Lord like needy children, and we have
to use all the means that are required, whatever the circumstances.

The Holy Curé of Ars would tell the story of a founder of an orphanage
who was considering the use of advertisements to attract donations. The
saint advised that founder, "Rather than making noise in the papers, why
don\'t you make a fuss before the tabernacle?"

Our Lord wants us to bring our concerns before Him right there in Our
Lady. She has her hands open.

We have to use human means also if that will help. But down through the
centuries, Christians have been moved to present their petitions to God
through Our Lady.

St. Bernard teaches us that our advocate was assumed into heaven,
precisely so that she could act as Mother of the Judge and Mother of
Mercy. There she will work on behalf of our salvation (St. Bernard,
*Sermon I on the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary*). We should not
fail to go to her with all of our needs each day.

There is a story told of a young military person who was doing military
service in a certain country. In the summertime, they would go to there
to do this particular job.

There was a brand-new lieutenant who showed up at the post to give
orders. The lieutenant told this young fellow to go to a certain place,
but to go there on horseback. This young fellow had never ridden before.

So that evening at dinner, he was asking many people around the place
all about horses, looking for suggestions. Somebody said, "Look, all you
have to do is to get up on the horse with confidence, and don\'t let the
horse suspect that this is your first time, that you\'ve never ridden
before. That\'s absolutely critical."

Early the next morning, the soldier got a horse and did as he was told.
He climbed onto the horse, but in such a way that the animal knew
immediately who was in charge. The horse took off at a trot. This young
military conscript was clearly alarmed.

The horse eventually stopped when it felt like it. He began to graze,
paying no attention to the rider who was pulling on the reins. Then,
again when the horse felt like it, it would break into a trot along the
journey. And sometimes it would canter. The young conscript was totally
distraught.

Then he came across a team of army engineers who were laying some
electrical cables. One of the engineers called out, "Hey, you, where are
you heading?"

With an act of resignation, the young conscript with an air of confusion
said, "Who, me? I\'m going to such and such a place. But I don\'t know
where the horse is going."

We might be asked the same question: "Hey, you! Where are you going?"

We might be tempted to say, "I\'m headed for love. I\'m headed for
truth. I\'m headed for joy. What I don\'t know is where life is taking
me!" (Ángel María García Dorronsoro, *Time to Believe*).

It would be marvelous if we could answer the question saying, "I\'m
going to God through my work, through my difficulties, perhaps through
my ill health." This is where the goods of the earth should be leading
us.

It would be a pity if we had converted those things into a means and not
an end.

We can ask Our Lady that she might keep us on the right track, so we
might always know what our destination is, and know the means of finding
God in the ordinary things of each day.

We might ask Our Lady that wherever life may seem to be taking us, it
might take us in the right direction, with the guidance of Our Lady. And
through the old ups and downs, or difficulties or contradictions that we
might experience, Our Lady will be there to guide us to that safe home.

Our Lady is truly our hope. She helps us to put our hearts in the right
place and helps us to go in the right direction, even if it might seem
that everything else is going in the opposite direction.

From the earliest times, Christians have been inspired to pray to God
through the intercession of Our Lady. She showed the power of her
intercession at Cana in Galilee (John 2:1-11).

The Second Vatican Council has stated in *Lumen gentium* that in the
public life of Our Lord, Mary makes significant appearances. This is so
even at the very beginning, when at the marriage feast of Cana, moved
with pity, she brought about by her intercession the beginning of the
miracles of Jesus the Messiah.

Our Lady is always present in the salvific work of Our Lord. On that
specific occasion, she not only resolved the immediate crisis concerning
the wine, which Our Lord provided in great measure, but she also
confirmed the faith of the disciples.

We're told in St. John: "This, the first of his signs, Jesus did at Cana
in Galilee, and manifested his glory; and his disciples believed in him"
(John 2:11).

Our Lady is always attentive to the needs and problems of her children.
She is a great intercessor on our behalf. She speeds up our petitions to
Our Lord and puts them better than we could if so needed.

St. Alphonsus says, "Why are the prayers of Mary so highly regarded by
God?"

He says, "Let us remember that the prayers of the saints are the prayers
of his servants. But the prayers of Mary are the prayers of his Mother.
This is the reason for their efficacy and authority. Since Jesus has an
incredible love for his Mother, he responds to her every request."

St. Alphonsus continues, "To go deeper in our understanding of Mary\'s
importance, we need only turn to the Gospel text. The wine failed at the
marriage feast at Cana. The bridal party was at risk of great
embarrassment. No one asked Our Lady to become involved, to seek her
Son\'s assistance.

"Here we see the heart of Mary quick to respond with sympathy for the
family. She takes the task of intercession upon herself. Acting on her
own initiative, she asks Our Lord for a miracle. If this was her way of
acting when no one had asked for her help, what would be her response to
those who pray for her intercession?" (Alphonsus Liguori, *Abbreviated
Sermons*).

Our Lady is a Mother who is more attentive to all our needs than any
other mother on earth ever has been or ever will be.

A miracle at Cana takes place because Our Lady has interceded. It
happens only because of her petition.

In the Litany, we refer to Our Lady as *Virgin Most Powerful*. It is the
name that Christian piety has given to her, because her Son is God and
cannot refuse her anything (John Paul II, *Homily*, October 21, 1979).

She is always aware of our spiritual and material needs. She desires,
even more than we do, that we should not cease imploring her
intercession before God on our behalf.

We may be so needy, and yet we may be slow to ask. We may show little
trust and little patience when what we ask for seems a long time in
coming.

We can turn more frequently to Our Lady, Comforter of the Afflicted. We
can put more trust into our petitions, knowing that she will always
obtain for us what we most need.

If she obtained from her Son wine that was not absolutely necessary,
would she not find a solution for all those other needs that we have?

We're told in *The Forge*, Point 807, "I want, Lord, to abandon the care
of all my affairs into your generous hands. Our Mother---your
Mother---will have let you hear those words, now as in Cana: 'They have
none!' I believe in you, I hope in you, I love you, Jesus. I want
nothing for myself: it's for them."

Our Lady is truly Our Mother in that she is continually giving birth to
the supernatural life within us.

The Second Vatican Council says, "She conceived, brought forth, and
nourished Christ, she presented him to the Father in the temple, shared
her Son\'s sufferings as he died on the cross. And so, in a wholly
singular way she cooperated by her obedience, faith, hope, and burning
charity in the work of the Savior in restoring supernatural life to
souls. For this reason, she is a Mother to us in the order of grace
(Vatican II, *Lumen gentium*, Point 61, November 21, 1964).

That motherhood, we are told by the Council, "will last forever...until
the perpetual consummation of all the elect. For, having been assumed to
heaven, she has not left behind the salvific mission, but through her
constant intercession, continues to obtain for us the gifts of eternal
salvation.

"With her motherly love, she looks after the brothers and sisters of her
Son, who are still wayfarers and a prey to danger and uncertainty until
they at last reach their heavenly home" (*Ibid*., Point 62).

Our Lord gave us Our Mother after He had been nailed to the Cross:
"'Woman, behold your son!' Then he said to the disciple, 'Behold your
mother!'" (John 19:26-27).

St. John Paul II says, "In a new way, he bequeathed his own Mother to
the man: the man to whom he has transmitted the Gospel. He has
bequeathed her to all men. ... From that day onwards, the whole Church
has her as Mother. And all men have her as Mother. The words pronounced
upon the Cross are understood as being addressed to each one of us"
(John Paul II, *General Audience*, January 10, 1979).

Our Lord looks at us one by one. 'Behold your mother,' He says.

John took her into his home, received her lovingly, and cared for her
with the greatest respect.

"He brought Mary into his home, into his life," said St. Josemaría in
*Christ Is Passing By.* *"*Spiritual writers have seen these words of
the Gospel as an invitation to all Christians to bring Mary into their
lives. Mary certainly wants us to invoke \[her\], to approach her
confidently, to appeal to her as Our Mother, asking her to 'show that
you are Our Mother'\"(J. Escrivá, *Christ Is Passing By,* Point 140).

In giving His Mother to be Our Mother, Christ gives proof of His love
for His own until the end (cf. John 13:1). In accepting the Apostle John
as her son, Our Lady shows her motherly love for all men.

She has had a distinctive and decisive influence on our lives. Each of
us has our own experience. Looking back, we may see her intervention
behind every problem, driving us forward and with a definitive push to
make us begin anew.

One writer says, "Whenever I get down to thinking about the numerous
graces I have received from Mary, I feel like one of those Marian
shrines on the walls of which, covered with offerings, there is
inscribed only, 'Through the grace received from Mary.' In this way, it
seems that I\'m written all over, 'Through grace received from Mary.'

"Every good thought, every good act of the will, every movement of my
heart: 'Through the grace received from Mary'" (Guiseppe Maria
Masserano, *The Life of St. Leonard of Port Maurice*).

We can turn to Our Lady once again, Comforter of the Afflicted, and ask
her to show herself to be a Mother to us, and that we will also try to
prove ourselves to be good children of hers, turning to her with more
faith and confidence, knowing that we will find consolation and joy for
all our needs.

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, Saint
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*NJF*
