---
layout: homily
title: "Taking Advantage of the Means of Formation"
---


By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

"Now as they went on their way, they entered a village, and a woman
named Martha received him into her house. She had a sister called Mary,
who sat at the Lord\'s feet and listened to his teaching. But Martha was
distracted with much serving, and she went to him and said, 'Lord, do
you not care that my sister has left me to serve alone? Tell her then to
help me'" (Luke 10:38-40).

Mary sat at the Lord\'s feet, and in some ways is a model of piety. This
meditation is about piety---to take advantage of the means of formation.

In the modern world, the word "piety" has come to be associated with
being religious. While it does have a religious application, its
original meaning was far wider and richer.

The English word "piety" comes from the Latin *pietas*, which spoke of
family love, and by extension, love for those who went before one in
one\'s family, love of one\'s country, and love of God.

Cicero defined *pietas* as the virtue "which admonishes us to do our
duty to our country, or our parents, or other blood relations."

For the ancient Romans, piety was one of the highest virtues, since it
was the virtue that knit families, and ultimately all society, together
in love, loyalty, and a shared reciprocal duty.

Piety also roots us in our past and helps us to give proper reverence to
those who have gone before us.

It\'s like the glue that holds us together. Without its precious
effects, we fall apart into factions, our families dissolve, and the
"weave" of our culture gives way to tear and dry rot.

Piety is the just recognition of all we owe our elders. The basis of
piety is the sober realization that we owe our existence and our
substance to powers beyond ourselves.

We are social, communal beings. We are not islands. We're part of the
mainland.

This gift of the Holy Spirit, which comes to us in the sacraments, is
"not identified with having compassion for someone or having pity for
one\'s neighbor; but it indicates our belonging to God and our profound
bond with Him, a bond that gives meaning to the whole of our life and
which keeps us firm, in communion with Him, also in the most difficult
and trying moments.

"It is our friendship with God, given us by Jesus, a friendship that
changes our lives and fills us with enthusiasm and joy" (Pope Francis,
*General Audience*, June 4, 2014).

Therefore, the gift of piety arouses in us, first of all, gratitude and
praise.

It teaches us the meaning of our divine affiliation, the joyful,
supernatural awareness of being children of God, and in Jesus Christ;
brothers and sisters of all mankind.

It impels us to maintain the attitude of childlike intimacy with God.
"Unless you become like little children, you cannot enter the kingdom of
heaven" (Matt.18:3).

The gift of piety means to be truly capable of rejoicing with those in
joy, to weep with those who weep, to welcome and help those who are in
need.

There is a very close relationship between the gift of piety and
meekness. We can pray: 'Make us meek, tranquil, patient, at peace with
God.'

"When the Holy Spirit makes us perceive the presence of the Lord and all
his love for us, it warms our hearts, and moves us almost naturally to
prayer and celebration. Piety, therefore, is a synonym of authentic
religious spirit, our filial confidence in God, of that capacity to pray
to him with love and simplicity which is proper to persons who are
humble of heart. ... May the Holy Spirit give all of us this gift of
piety" (*Ibid*.).

If some time we might feel indifferent towards the things of God, this
virtue can help us feel attracted to them.

This doesn\'t mean that prayer will always be a joy. Even Jesus Himself
suffered His agony in the garden.

St. Josemaría in *The Forge* says, "You must be constant and demanding
with yourself in your regular practices of piety, even when you feel
tired and arid. Persevere! Those moments are like the tall red-painted
poles which serve as markers along the mountain roads when there are
heavy snowfalls. They are always there to show you where it is safe to
go" (Josemaría Escrivá, *The Forge*, Point 81).

"Interior life," he says, "is strengthened by a daily struggle in your
practices of piety, which you should fulfill---or rather which you
should live!---lovingly, for the path we travel as children of God is a
path of love.

"Seek God in the depths of your pure, clean heart; in the depths of your
soul when you are faithful to him. Never lose that intimacy! ---And if
ever you do not know how to speak to him, or what to say, or you do not
dare to look for Jesus inside yourself, turn to Mary, *tota pulchra*,
all pure and wonderful, and tell her: 'Our Lady and Mother, the Lord
wanted you yourself to look after God and tend him with your own hands.
Teach me, teach us all how to treat your Son!'" (*Ibid*., Points 83-84).

Through piety, you will know almost instinctively that you cannot get
through life without prayer any more than you can survive without food.

Adoration and prayer are the principal acts of the virtue of religion.
They are also natural obligations.

St. Thomas affirms, "Prayer is proper to the rational creature, because
only a creature with an intellect can realize that he is dependent on
God. ... Only one who is free can acknowledge this dependence as a duty
and not just an instinctive tendency" (Thomas Aquinas, *Summa
Theologiae*, II. II. and First Part, Question 83).

St. Josemaría liked to strongly exclaim, "Only animals do not pray."

Pope St. John Paul II teaches that "prayer is...the acknowledgment of
our limits and dependence: we come from God, we exist in God, and to God
we will return" (John Paul II, *Address to Young People*, March 14,
1979).

"Hence, we cannot but abandon ourselves to him, our Creator and Lord,
with full and complete confidence. ... Prayer is above all an act of the
intellect, a sense of humility and gratitude, an attitude of trust and
abandonment in him who has given his life for the love of us" (*Ibid*.).

"Silence and contemplation have a purpose: they serve, in the
distractions of daily life, to preserve a permanent union with God"
(Pope Benedict XVI, *Homily*, October 6, 2006).

St. Josemaría liked to say that a sanctity without doctrine is not the
sanctity of Opus Dei. Piety leads us to want to be formed and to take
advantage of the means of formation.

Superficiality is not Christian. Therefore, our piety stirs an interest
to know God through books, classes, seminars; to know His life; to talk
to Him in prayer; to understand the workings of His heart.

All this is so as not to get carried away by sentimentalism or
superficiality.

There\'s a difference between flying a plane for the first time with a
manual of instructions under your arm and flying it with ease, with your
eyes closed.

That ease in the spiritual life is given by familiarity with God---not
knowing Him in theory or because we\'ve heard about Him, but it is to be
joyful with Him, to weep with Him.

Knowing a lot about God but not loving Him more is not so useful. "With
your life of piety," says St. Josemaría, "you will learn to practice the
virtues befitting your condition as a child of God, as a Christian.
