---
layout: homily
title: "The Presentation of Our Lady"
---


By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

"He was still speaking to the crowds when suddenly his mother and his
brothers were standing outside. And they were anxious to have a word
with him. But to the man who told him this, Jesus replied, 'Who is my
mother, and who are my brothers?' And stretching out his hand toward his
disciples, he said, 'Here are my mother and my brothers! Anyone who does
the will of my Father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother'"
(Matt. 12:46-50).

The Church places before us these words, this passage of the Gospel, on
the Feast of the Presentation of Our Lady, to remind us of how Jesus
elevated His Mother because she was the one who most fulfilled the will
of His Father in heaven.

Our Lord lifts up His Mother. And this Feast of the Presentation well
recalls the consecration of the Church in Jerusalem, dedicated to the
Presentation of Our Lady.

It was built to commemorate the commitment that Our Lady made when she
was moved by the grace of the Holy Spirit during her childhood to
dedicate herself completely to God.

St. Josemaría loved the word *commitment.* We are called to be very
committed. Somebody said once: Tell me what you are committed to, and I
will tell you what sort of person you are. And tell me how committed you
are, and even more will I tell you what sort of person you are.

Our Lady was totally committed, led by the grace of the Holy Spirit to
dedicate herself completely to God. And through the grace of the
Immaculate Conception, she enjoys the gracious participation of the life
of grace of any creature.

We look to Our Mother, full of grace, full of beauty because grace makes
us beautiful in the eyes of God. That\'s why our eyes can always be
attracted to Mary.

The Father of the Church has said*, De Maria numquam satis*---we can
never have too much of Our Lady (St. Bernard of Clairvaux). By her great
participation in the life of grace, she draws us to grace, to the source
of grace.

The Feast of the Presentation of Our Lady has been celebrated in the
Western world since the 14th century. So it has quite a history.

We know very little about the early life of Our Lady until the moment
when the angel Gabriel appeared to her to communicate her vocation to
her. Her existence on earth was very unique up to that particular
moment.

We do know that she was full of grace from the first moment of her
conception. Throughout her life, God specially watched over her, with an
unrepeatable love.

But at the same time, we can imagine that Our Lady was a very normal
child. She grew up like all the other children in her neighborhood and
experienced all the things that little children experience. She must
have been a delight for her friends, in all the ordinary, everyday
circumstances of her life and of her town.

When St. Luke is writing his Gospel, he likes to bring out as much
personal information about people as he can. But in Our Lady\'s case,
there is no mention of any specific facts.

Probably Our Lady never really mentioned much about her early life.
Maybe there was very little in those early years of extraordinary
interest. All the important things happened in the intimacy of her soul,
in the context of her continual dialogue with God.

Mary, may you help me in my commitment to have that sort of dialogue
with Our God, living in His presence, continually thanking Him for
things, lifting things up in adoration and praise, asking pardon for the
things that may be wrong.

At the Annunciation, Our Lady calmly awaits her correspondence for the
Incarnation of the Son of God to occur. One spiritual writer says, "O
Holy Mother, why do you remain silent about the years of your childhood?
The apocryphal gospels relate pious lies that are really deceitful
images of your true nature. They falsely inform us that you lived day
and night in the Temple, where the angels brought you meals and
conversed with you. Such fabrications represent you to us as far removed
from our daily experience" (S. Muñoz, *The Gospel of Mary*).

Saints and other writers have written, emphasizing the importance of the
ordinary aspects of Our Lady\'s life. Her life must have resembled in
many ways the ordinary tasks and duties of our own daily lives.

We have this Feast of the Presentation of Our Lady to remind us of those
years. It\'s not a feast that has its origin in the Gospel, but more in
ancient tradition, that Our Lady was presented in the Temple by her
parents. The Church doesn\'t accept the fictitious narrative that she
spent all her life in the Temple under a vow of virginity.

But the essential basis of this feast is the offering that Our Lady made
of herself, a personal offering. Pope Paul VI in *Marialis Cultus*says,
"She was moved by the Holy Spirit to consecrate her life to God, who
filled her with grace from the first moment of her conception."

Mary\'s complete dedication was very effective and continued to grow as
she grew in her life. We could ask Our Lady that our commitment and our
dedication might continue to grow and that we renew our generosity in
the course of our lives.

We begin again. We renew that desire that led us to give ourselves
completely at a certain moment so that we\'re always following in the
footsteps of Mary, and that everything that happens is like a constant
invitation to us to begin again, a new level of that generosity.

Our Lady\'s example can move us not to withhold anything in our own life
of dedication because as human beings with original sin, we\'re capable
of saying, 'I give myself to you completely,' but then the next hour or
two or day, we take it all back again.

That commitment, that dedication, that generosity has to be constantly
renewed---signing our contract, as it were, over and over again. Every
year we\'re encouraged on March 19^th^ to renew that commitment. But
it\'s something that needs to be renewed more frequently than every
year. Mary, may I give myself to you completely.

This feast celebrates the complete surrender of Our Lady to God\'s plans
for the salvation of mankind. God also wants our complete surrender,
because we participate in this salvation, this great enterprise of
redemption and salvation, which at times may demand that we stand beside
the Cross, but also demands that we\'re involved in the little things of
every day.

"They have no wine" (John 2:3). Our Lady was close to her friends,
attentive, taking care of little details, involved in the great things,
the big things, but also very attentive to the small things.

In the light of her total commitment, which implies the state of
virginity, Our Lady is going to say to the angel Gabriel, "I know not
man" (Luke 1:34). She tactfully reveals the entire history of fidelity
to God that has taken place within her soul.

She\'s dedicated herself completely. She already personifies the later
fulfillment of the New Testament\'s affirmation of virginity's
superiority over the state of marriage. But that superiority in no way
lessens the sanctity of marriage. The Second Vatican Council says Christ
Himself raised marriage to the dignity of a sacrament (Vatican II,
*Gaudium et spes*, Point 48).

Mary, I want to ask you today to help me to live out my dedication to
the full, to practice the virtues with all their consequences, human and
supernatural, all the way, going the whole hog, holding nothing back.

In whatever situation or state God may place me, in accordance with this
specific calling that God has given to me, this is where He wants me to
be holy. This is where He wants me to do apostolate. This is the job
that He wants me to do well today.

When St. Josemaría was walking along a corridor and he found some people
painting something, he would say to them, *Cada pincelada, un acto de
amor,* Each stroke of the brush, an act of love. Very relevant words for
the ordinary tasks that we have to fulfill every day. Each stroke of the
brush is an act of love. We bring love into everything we do.

St. Josemaría has written in *The Forge*, "Talk with Our Lady and tell
her trustingly, 'O Mary, in order to live the ideal which God has set in
my heart, I need to fly very high---ever so high!'"

"It is not sufficient," he says, "to detach yourself, with God\'s help,
from the things of this world, recognizing them as merest clay. More is
needed: even if you were to put the whole universe in a pile under your
feet to get closer to Heaven\...it wouldn\'t suffice!

"You have to fly, without the support of anything here on earth, relying
on the voice and the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. And you will tell
me: 'But my wings are stained and smeared with the clinging mud of many
years.'

"And I repeat: Turn to Our Lady. 'Mary,' you should say to her again, 'I
can hardly get off the ground. The earth draws me like an accursed
magnet. Mary, you can make my soul take off on that glorious and
definitive flight which has as its destination the very heart of God.'
