---
layout: homily
title: "Our Lady of Africa"
---


By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

"My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God, my Savior"
(Luke 1:46-47).

Today is the feast of Our Lady of Africa.

The story goes that the first Bishop of Algiers, after the conquest of
that country by the French at the beginning of the 1800s, was without a
church or a residence. He was also without any funds and was surrounded
by Muslims, whose hostility was quite evident and whose friendship had
to be won.

He returned to his native Lyon in France and went to the Convent of the
Sacred Heart that was there and asked them if they might help him to get
a statue of Our Lady to place in his diocese there in Algiers. They were
able to acquire for him a bronze statue of the Immaculate Conception.

When he returned to Algiers, he gave the statue to the custody of the
Trappist Fathers, who were just beginning their mission there. That
particular Bishop passed away, and his successor laid the cornerstone
for the present Basilica in 1858.

It was on a hill overlooking the Bay of Algiers, overlooking the
Mediterranean. It was consecrated in 1872 by Cardinal Lavigerie, famous
for his activities to spread the Catholic faith in Africa.

The Trappist Fathers were reluctant to give up their statue, but
eventually they did, because they knew it was going to be placed in this
magnificent church, one of the gates to the African continent.

Shortly after, that image of Our Lady came to be known as Our Lady of
Africa, Consolation of the Afflicted. Very soon, devotion to her began
to spread.

The poor, the blind, the crippled, particularly sailors and soldiers
came from all over the place to implore her help. The walls of the
Basilica were soon covered in huge numbers of offerings which attested
to miraculous cures.

A lady from France donated a very special robe to be placed around Our
Lady. Pope Pius IX gave a golden crown with precious stones to adorn the
image of Our Lady.

That same Cardinal founded a congregation of the Sisters of Our Lady of
Africa and placed them under her protection. And so, the story of Our
Lady of Africa began to grow.

That image of Our Lady, although in a Catholic church, is venerated by
many Muslims. Every day many of them come to ask whom they call *Lala
Meriem* as they call the Blessed Virgin, for special favors.

They\'re very aware of the presence of Our Lady who is referred to in
the Quran. So they come to ask her for things. Her fame spread all over
that part of northern Africa. They\'re aware of the unique position of
Our Lady among Catholics and come to be very devoted to her.

Over the centuries they have grown in devotion. St. Louis of France
talked about how he was a prisoner of the Muslims in the Holy Land.

He received a gift very generously from them of an image of Our Lady,
from the hands of the Sultan. *Lala Meriem* is kept in great esteem.

There\'s great veneration because so many Muslims frequent that
particular Catholic church. One chaplain of the Basilica approached two
Muslims who had been praying there and asked them why they had come.

They said they\'d come to ask *Lala Meriem* to obtain the cessation of
the famine in their village. Another woman said, "I\'m sick and I suffer
so much. You must cure me, *Meriem*." Another lady said, "I asked her
that she might send me a good husband."

Some people go to the chaplains and say, "I was asking *Meriem* for her
*haraka*, her blessing." Many people come to place a candle before the
shrine of *Lala Meriem*.

It\'s a very beautiful place. It stands on a cliff overlooking that bay.

Women, young girls, grandmothers can often be seen praying in front of
the beautiful bronze statue. They often spend time looking at the
decoration of the church, the Stations of the Cross, the frescoes of the
life of St. Augustine, the fourth-century Bishop of Hippo, born in
Tagaste. Augustine is Christianity's first and foremost, most famous
Algerian.

Underneath the frescoes, there are phrases of St. Augustine in Arabic,
and also in French and Kabyle, which say, "Brotherly love comes from God
and is God"---strong words in a very difficult context of the country
where many kill in the name of Allah.

Algeria was Christian and Marian from the second century. In 200 BC, the
kingdom passed on to the dominion of the Roman Empire, and for nine
centuries it was Christian, until the Arab invasion and its
Islamization.

But that Arab Islamic conquest was slow and arduous because that part of
northern Africa had a flourishing Christian community.

The conversion to Christianity of the Roman Emperor Constantine in the
third century increased the Church\'s influence in northern Africa.

Carthage became important as the city of St. Augustine, a Berber
Christian and one of the most universally known Doctors of the Catholic
Church. Pope Benedict quotes him frequently.

Algeria has many Christian basilicas and shrines. But with that Arab
invasion, the Church of Africa was decimated and only reestablished in
1830 with the arrival of the French.

Our Lady of Africa is there to protect all of this. We can ask her for
special graces, for the fruit, and for the future of the evangelization
of Africa, a land of special martyrs.

In the latter part of the 20th century, in 1995, Pope John Paul II
convened in Rome a Synod on Africa. The findings of that Synod are
reflected in a document called *Ecclesia in Africa*, or 'The Church in
Africa."

It is worthwhile reading some time. It's like the ideas of the Catholic
Church wants to shape Africa within the 21st century.

In that document, Pope John Paul says, "It seems that the 'hour of
Africa' has come, a favorable time which urgently invites Christ\'s
messengers to launch out into the deep and to cast their nets for the
catch (cf. Luke 5:4)."

On this Feast of Our Lady of Africa, each one of us who are recipients
of this great legacy, the Christian history of Africa, have to try and
renew our desires to be true apostles.

Pope Paul VI says "a new homeland for Christ", "a land loved by the
Eternal Father"---this is what Africa has become.

"That is why," he says, "I greeted that moment of grace in the words of
the Psalmist: 'This is the day which the Lord has made; let us rejoice
and be glad in it'" (Ps. 118:24).

Pope John Paul liked to "recall the different phases of missionary
commitment" and to "examine the various aspects of the evangelizing
mission which the Church must take into account at this present time:
evangelization, inculturation, dialogue, justice and peace, and the
means of social communication."

He said when we look at these areas, then we can come to see "the
responsibilities of the Church in Africa as a missionary church: a
Church of mission which itself becomes missionary."

We're told in the Acts of the Apostles: "You will be my witnesses to the
ends of the earth" (Acts 1:8). And so, in the 21st century, the Church
looks to a whole new flourishing of Christianity on this continent.

"Lord, to whom shall we go?" said St. Peter. "You have the words of
eternal life, and we have believed, and have come to know, that you are
the Holy One of God" (John 6:68-69).

The Pope continues: "African Catholics are assuming ever greater
responsibility in their local Churches and are seeking a deeper
understanding of what it means to be both Catholic and African.

"The Church has the duty to affirm vigorously that these difficulties
can be overcome. She must strengthen in all Africans the hope of genuine
liberation. ... The Holy Spirit is the principal agent of
evangelization. He\'s the one who impels each individual to proclaim the
Gospel" with our words and with our deeds.

"He\'s the one with the depths of conscience, causing the words of
salvation to be accepted and understood."

The Pope says, "Our cooperation is necessary" in this great evangelizing
task "through fervent prayer, serious reflection, suitable planning, and
the mobilization of resources."

As ordinary lay people in the middle of the world, charged in this
period of history with this great apostolic enterprise, the Pope is
saying to each one of us that we need to be people of "fervent prayer"
