---
layout: homily
title: "Perseverance"
---


By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

I read a book once about the Battle of Monte Cassino. Monte Cassino is a
monastery just south of Rome, where St. Benedict is buried together with
his sister, St. Scholastica.

The German army occupied that abbey on a hill outside of Rome, a
prominent hill overlooking the approach road to Rome from the south.

The Allies landed. It was the winter of 1944, much further south in
Italy, Anzio, and they made their way up the center of Italy little by
little.

There was a journalist in the front lines of that group who wrote the
story. He said it was cold in the front lines, the shells were landing
everywhere, and the soldiers were tired. Anyone in their right mind
would have wanted to be somewhere else.

The mules who would bring the food each night after dark sometimes were
shot, and the food wouldn\'t get through, so the soldiers were hungry.
Each evening also, the wounded were taken back on mules back to the home
lines.

The temptation to desert was very great. One day, two soldiers decided
to desert.

They feigned that they were wounded, but there was a sergeant with a gun
examining all the wounded to check that they were really wounded.

He discovered these two and he ordered them back to the front lines.
These tired, battle-weary soldiers went back to their positions, and
they fought on.

Eventually, the Germans were pushed back off that promontory. They
withdrew to the north of Italy. Rome was spared. It was one of the most
decisive battles of the Second World War.

It was won with tired soldiers. St. Josemar√≠a often liked to say that
battles are won with tired soldiers.

We find a lot of emphasis in Scripture on the virtue of perseverance.

"Well done, good and faithful servant! Because you have been faithful in
little things, I have great things to commit to your charge" (cf. Matt.
25:23).

"I fought the good fight, I finished the race, I look forward to the
prize" (2 Tim. 4:7).

"Where else shall we go? You have the words of eternal life" (cf. John
6:68).

Many words of Our Lord are words of encouragement to keep going forward
in the battle, not to give up---or even if we do feel like giving up, to
go back and begin again.

"Let us never slacken in doing good," says St. Paul, "for if we do not
give up, we shall have our harvest in due time" (Gal. 6:9).

"I have loved you just as the Father has loved me. Remain in my love"
(John 15:9).

Again and again, Our Lord emphasizes the importance of these virtues. We
can ask Him for that grace to grow in the virtue of perseverance, to
hang in there.

Last week, Helen Nairobi, an Irish Loreto nun, celebrated her 100th
birthday. She arrived in Kenya in 1946. She had been here for 74 years.

Every so often we hear one of these stories. Fidelity and perseverance
are very beautiful, very inspiring.

All over the world, there are similar stories of people who have gone
before us, who have led very heroic lives. Perhaps they have set up the
educational system of a country or the healthcare system.

We leave a legacy of fidelity and perseverance to those who come after
us.

Our Christian vocation in the middle of the world demands that same
spirit in our marriage, in our family, in our work, in our apostolate
