---
layout: homily
title: "The Parable of the Mustard Seed"
---

The Parable of the Mustard Seed

By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins, and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

"He put before them another parable: 'The kingdom of heaven is like a
mustard seed which a man took and sowed in his field. It is the smallest
of all the seeds, but when it has grown, it is the biggest of shrubs and
becomes a tree, so that the birds of the air can come and shelter in its
branches'" (Matt. 13:31-32).

Seen in the light of our spiritual growth, the growth of the mustard
seed could be seen as the description of a saint.

We cannot begin to understand what we will be like when we get to
heaven. It\'s easy to forget that our destiny is to become saints.

In heaven, we will have been purified by our spiritual growth here on
earth, and probably also by the fires of purgatory.

There will be no sinful obstacles to our love of God in heaven, and we
cannot begin to imagine what that will be like.

These parables form a beautiful reminder of God\'s promises for us.

If times seem hard for God\'s Church here on earth, we can refuse to be
daunted by the world and by persecution. "There is no servant greater
than the master" (John 13:16).

"If the world has hated us, it has hated Jesus first" (*cf*. John
15:18).

\"God so loved the world that he gave his only Son" (John 3:16) for its
redemption.

We can try to allow Our Lord to grow in our hearts, and in this way, we
will be witnesses to the spread of God\'s Kingdom in our time.

The parable of the mustard seed expresses the small beginnings of God\'s
Kingdom on earth. Jesus ascended to heaven, leaving a tiny band of
followers to take on one of the greatest empires yet seen on the earth.

Who in that time could have foreseen that the Church would spread across
the whole world two thousand years later?

The parable declares that the Church will become large enough for the
birds of the air to come and nest in her shade. This applies to the rest
of the world.

The people whom the charity of the Church reaches are everywhere. The
charity of the members of the Mystical Body of Christ has no limit.
There is now no country in the world which has no people helped by the
generosity of the People of God.

In the last few weeks, I\'ve been reading a book on the history of the
Diocese of Nakuru here in Kenya. There\'s one particular picture in that
book of a tent.

It was the first tent that was placed in a certain area of the country
called Nakuru, inhabited by an Irish missionary priest, a Kiltegan
priest, called Father Luke Plunkett. It\'s a rather iconic photo because
it shows how the mission started with that tent.

Now there\'s a flourishing diocese 100 years later, with nearly 100
priests and maybe half that number of seminarians. Other dioceses have
come from that diocese. It has produced missionaries and all sorts of
other people, schools, hospitals.

It\'s one of the many examples of what comes from the mustard seed. This
is how God works.

We should never be surprised by the smallness, of the poverty, of our
beginnings. What God wants us to do is to plant the seeds.

You may have heard many times in these meditations the story of the
Loreto Sisters here in Kenya. Six of them arrived, Irish, back in 1921.

They celebrated their centenary in Kenya last year. And from that six,
something like a million girls have been educated all over the country.

Many other religious congregations involved in education and health care
have the same story to tell all over the world---the great things that
have come from the mustard seeds.

Here in Africa, because of the recent nature of a lot of these things,
the histories have been written and it\'s very easy to access the
stories. Each one of them is more inspiring than the previous.

Pope Francis also tells the beautiful story of how he was going out one
time, I think, to a party when he was sixteen years of age. He happened
to pass by his local church, and he decided to go in to make a quick
visit to the Blessed Sacrament.

There was a priest there hearing Confession, so he decided to go in to
receive the sacrament. He said, "It was in that Confession that I
decided to become a priest" (Vatican News, *Pope Francis Discovers
Vocation to Priesthood*, September 21, 2023).

He responded to God\'s call. The Holy Spirit used that priest in the
confessional to plant that mustard seed in his soul of a divine
vocation.

Now we have a great pope doing wonderful things all over the world, the
leader of the world---not just the spiritual leader---because of that
mustard seed planted by that priest, whom God maybe had hearing
Confessions all through his life for hours on end, but not knowing that
one day he was to be the mustard seed that God was going to use to
produce enormous fruit.

We have no idea how God is using our correspondence to His call to plant
those mustard seeds of faith and holiness in our families, in our
children, through our example of honesty or integrity, or with our
employees, or in our neighborhood, or our example of fidelity to our
Christian vocation, or our example of temperance with our friends.

The mustard seed of good example in our social and professional and
family life can change the world.

From the mustard seed here in Africa that the missionaries planted with
nothing a hundred years ago, the Church has come to be the leading
provider of quality social services and is at the center of many key
development initiatives.

If anything, very little is known about the important role of the
Catholic Church in modern African society.

John Paul II liked to refer to the great growth of the Catholic Church
in Africa in the 20th century (John Paul II, Apostolic Exhortation,
*Ecclesia in Africa*, September 14, 1995).

From just a couple of a hundred thousand Catholics at the turn of the
20th century, there are millions and millions of Catholics today.

He expressed the hope that the 21st century would be the century of
Asia, where similar growth would take place (John Paul II, Apostolic
Exhortation, *Ecclesia in Asia*, November 6, 1999).

At the moment Africa is the only continent where the number of Catholics
is increasing. The contribution of the Catholic Church to human
development in Africa is constantly increasing.

If you have any relatives or know of any people from your country who
were missionaries in Africa a hundred years ago, or even fifty years
ago, it would be worthwhile to find out their story from relatives or
friends or from books. It\'s a beautiful story.

The role of the Church in Africa is particularly notable in education
and health provision. In Kenya alone, the Church runs something like 30
percent of the hospitals in the country.

In other countries, the Church is the backbone of the educational and
healthcare system. In the last ten years, Africa is the continent which
has recorded the largest increase in the number of schools managed by
the Catholic Church.

In the same period of time, in matters of health, it has recorded the
largest increase in the number of healthcare facilities managed by the
Church.

One writer has said, "The market shares of Catholic schools and
healthcare facilities are higher in sub-Saharan Africa than in the rest
of the world---not to mention the fact that in sub-Saharan Africa,
satisfaction is higher with faith-based schools and health care
facilities than with public providers" (Nicolas Pompigne-Mognard,
*Talk*, August 2, 2022).

I\'ve always been impressed in the different countries where I have
lived of the appreciation and gratitude of the people in those countries
for what the missionaries did, what the missionaries gave them.

"The Church also manages countless medical schools and nursing schools
across the continent. More than ever, in Africa, the Church is at the
heart of education, health, conflict resolution" (*ibid*.)---all fruit
of the mustard seeds that have been sown down through the decades.

What we have to try and do now is put that mustard seed into
communication and let the story be known, to inspire many young people
to do great things with their lives as their predecessors have done.

One writer says the growth prospects in Africa are among the highest in
the world. In Uganda, something like 50 percent of the country are under
25 years of age. In Kenya, it\'s something like 40 percent.

Many multinational corporations are moving their headquarters to more
strategic places because they realize the growth and the potential that
there is there.

One great story that we can try to make better known in the world is
what the Church is doing to improve the well-being of the people on this
continent.

One way we can try to do that is to professionalize the public relations
of the Church, particularly by using public relations services utilized
by other private and public entities.

It\'s not just to make the story known. It\'s to plant seeds of love, of
inspiration, of Christ-like generosity, of correspondence to vocation in
many hearts and minds and souls all over the planet, so that the 21st
century can be all those things that Pope St. John Paul II dreamed it
would be---with all the fruits of the mustard seeds that we find in his
\[fourteen\] Encyclicals, with all the ideas they contain of what God
wants the Church to be in this century.

Pope St. John Paul called the media "the first Areopagus of the modern
age." He declared that "it is not enough to use the media simply to
spread the Christian message and the Church\'s authentic teaching. It is
also necessary to integrate that message into the 'new culture' created
by modern communications" (John Paul II, *Redemptoris Missio*, Point
37-c, December 7, 1990).

"Doing that is all the more important today, since the media now
strongly influence what people think about life" (Pontifical Council for
Social Communications, *The Church and Internet*, February 22, 2002).

The world is craving for the guidance that the Catholic Church has to
offer. It\'s worthwhile going back and reading again the document of
John Paul II at the start of the new millennium.

The document precisely goes by that title: *At the Coming of the New
Millennium*. He invites us to launch out into the deep: to become a
professional seed-sower in all the opportunities of our life: familial,
social, professional. Present and implant those seeds of doctrine, of
truth, of love.

"The kingdom of God is God\'s effective but mysterious action in the
universe and in all the chaos of human events. He overcomes the
resistance of evil with patience, not with arrogance \[and\] outcry.

"For this reason, Our Lord compares the kingdom \[of God\] to a mustard
seed, the smallest of all the seeds, but destined to become a leafy tree
(*cf*. Matt. 13:31-32)" (John Paul II, *General Audience*, Point 2,
December 6, 2000).

We don\'t know how God is going to use the things we do, the example we
give in our family, the words we say, our example of holiness, our
virtue, our example of the centrality of the sacraments, of the
centrality of Christ in our life.

"The kingdom of God is grace, God\'s love for the world, the source of
our serenity and trust: 'Fear not, little flock,' Our Lord says in St.
Luke, 'for it is your Father\'s good pleasure to give you the kingdom'
(Luke 12:32)" (*ibid*.).

Pope John Paul said, "Fears, worries, and nightmares fade away, because
in the person of Christ, the kingdom of God is in our midst (*cf*. Luke
17:21). But man is not a passive witness to God\'s entrance into
history. Jesus asks us 'to seek' actively 'the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness' (Matt. 6:33) and to make this search our primary concern"
(John Paul II, *ibid.*, Points 2-3).

"Seek first the things that are above" (Col. 3:1). By doing that in our
own life, in our fidelity to our plan of life, our spiritual customs,
our regular reception of the sacraments, we live out this command that
Our Lord has given to us.

St. Paul says, "The kingdom of God does not mean food and drink but
righteousness" (Rom. 14:17) and he urges the faithful to "put their
members at the service of righteousness for sanctification" (*cf*. Rom.
6:13,19), because, he says, "none of us lives for ourselves, none of us
dies for ourselves" (Rom. 14:7).

"Do not give any parts of your bodies over to sin or to be used as
instruments of evil. Instead, give yourselves to God as people brought
to life from the dead, and give every part of your bodies to God to be
instruments of uprightness" (Rom. 6:13).

He says, "I am putting it in human terms because you are still weak
human beings. As once you surrendered yourself as servants to immorality
and to lawlessness, which results in more lawlessness, now you have to
surrender yourselves to uprightness, which is to result in
sanctification" (Rom. 6:19).

At any stage of our life, we can sow those seeds with our words, with
our example, with our prayer, with our daily living out of our *Morning
Offering*, using the time and the talents that God has given to us in
whatever circumstances we find ourselves.

In the *Our Father*, we pray, "Thy Kingdom come" (Matt. 6:10).

Lord, may all the seeds that I have sown or you have allowed me to sow
in my life---sometimes unconsciously---may they yield the abundant fruit
that you want from my life.

That petition "has risen \[to heaven\] many times in human history, like
a great breath of hope. Dante, in his paraphrase of the *Our Father*,
says, 'May the peace of your kingdom come to us.'... A petition which
turns our gaze to Christ\'s return and nourishes the desire for the
final coming of God\'s kingdom" (John Paul II, *ibid.*, Point 5).

We all have our role to play in the coming of the kingdom. We are
kingdom-builders.

"That desire," says the *Catechism of the Catholic Church*, "does not
distract the Church from her mission in the world, but commits her to it
more strongly" (*Catechism*, Point 2818).

In Africa today, you see lived out this commitment to mission. Things
that happened in previous centuries in other countries where the Church
grew to be the backbone of the country---it\'s happening at the moment
on this continent.

It\'s easier to see the things that other Christian countries may have
forgotten about or taken for granted or complained about. It\'s all on
the upper gradient here at the moment.

The Church commits itself to our mission in the world.

The Second Vatican Council has called our attention to this: the role of
the ordinary layperson. We\'ve all become missionaries in our family, in
our professional life, in our social life.

We are "waiting to be able to cross the threshold of the Kingdom, whose
seed and beginning is the Church, says *Lumen gentium*, when it comes to
the world in its fullness" (John Paul II, *ibid.*).

We can say, "Come, O Creator Spirit,\
Visit the souls of those who belong to you;\
Fill with your grace from on high\
The hearts which you have made."

"Spirit of God, make us ready to receive your visit. Make faith in the
word which saves grow in us. Be the living source of the hope which
blossoms in our lives. Be in us the breath of love that transforms us,
and the fire of charity which impels us to give ourselves to the service
of our brothers and sisters.

"You whom the Father has sent, teach us all things and make us grasp the
richness of the word of Christ. Strengthen our inner being, make us pass
from fear to confidence, so that the praise of your glory may burst
forth from us" (John Paul II, *Homily*, World Youth Day, August 23,
1997).

"Therefore, we...entrust ourselves to his hands, to his Word, to his
guidance, like inexperienced children who find security only in the
Father. 'Whoever does not accept the kingdom of God like a child shall
not enter into it' (Luke 18:17)" (John Paul II, *General Audience*,
Point 5, December 6, 2000).

We\'re told in St. Mark: "'This is what the kingdom of God is like. A
man scatters seed on the land. Night and day while he sleeps, when he is
awake, the seed is sprouting and growing; how, he does not know.

"'Of its own accord the land produces first the shoot, then the ear,
then the full grain in the ear. And when the crop is ready, at once he
starts to reap because the harvest has come.'

"He also said, 'What can we say what the kingdom is like? What parable
can we find for it? It is like a mustard seed which, at the time of its
sowing, is the smallest of all the seeds on earth. Once it is sown it
grows into the biggest shrub of them all and puts out big branches so
that the birds of the air can shelter in its shade'" (Mark 4:26-32).

Using many parables like these, He spoke the Word to them as far as they
were capable of understanding it.

We can think of the mustard seed in our own personal apostolate, in that
friendship that we try to foster with people around us: the time we
spend with them, every minute, every second, like a seed; the
conversations we have with them; efforts that we make that might seem to
be fruitless; like the farmer who scatters the seeds but not knowing
where that seed is going to land or how it\'s going to be fruitful.

We begin with small things. But we "launch out into the deep" (Luke
5:4), as Pope St. John Paul has encouraged us in that document *At the
Coming of the New Millennium*. We do so with faith and with daring.

That famous phrase that the astronaut said when he landed on the moon:
"One small step for man can be one great leap for mankind" (*cf*. Neil
Armstrong).

We don\'t live looking at the moon, but we can live and dream of
building schools and hospitals and works of apostolate, things that are
going to foster the well-being of mankind.

Or we can make that one small step of writing an article, or a book, or
maybe a letter to a newspaper, or attending that conference and having
an influence.

Or one small step of taking better care of the ordinary things that we
have to look after each day: this child, that relation, remembering that
birthday, preparing this meal, laying this table, mopping this floor,
double-checking this email, looking back at the room we\'ve just cleaned
to make sure that everything is right, doing our work with perfection.

All these things can be one small step that can be like little seeds, so
that in time there can be one great leap for mankind.

And when we sow the mustard seeds of truth---scientific truth---for
example, about the beginning of human life, the effects can be enormous.

In "The Gospel of Life"--*Evangelium Vitae*, Pope St. John Paul II says
we have to be "unconditionally pro-life."

In *The Forge*, we are told: "Make sure that your lips, the lips of a
Christian---for that is what you are and should be at all times---speak
those compelling supernatural words which will move and encourage, and
will show your committed attitude to life" (Josemaría Escrivá, *The
Forge*, Point 576).

Sometimes in conversations, in gatherings, in classes, conferences, God
may call us to be that voice of truth that goes against the grain, that
is not politically correct, but which spreads the truth in the world
that is hungry for that truth.

We are also told in *The Forge:* "The following comment, which caused me
great sorrow, will also make you reflect: 'I see very clearly why there
is a lack of resistance, and why what resistance there is to iniquitous
laws is so ineffective, for above, below, and in the middle there are
many people---so very many! ---who just follow the crowd'" (J. Escrivá,
*The Forge*, Point 465).

Our Christian vocation leads us to be the mustard seed in the middle of
society: a leader who doesn\'t just follow the crowd, who knows how to
be a bit of a rebel, because we\'ve come to bring about a Christian
revolution in the world, a revolution of love.

When you look at all the great apostolic works that are starting or have
started across the African continent in the past hundred years, really,
that\'s what you see: it\'s a great revolution of love.

There may be things that we don\'t know how to do or cannot do, but yet
they may be within our reach.

We can learn the gift of writing or of speaking. We spend a few minutes
each day writing a few ideas or words in response to an article in the
newspaper. We can create a river of truth.

If we try to become the person in our profession who knows most about
one particular area, because we\'ve read everything that\'s coming out
in that area over a couple of years, we can become the national expert
and have a great platform for influencing.

We\'re told in *The Forge*: "There is an urgent need for spreading the
doctrine of Christ. Store up your training, fill yourself with clear
ideas, with the fullness of the Christian message, so that afterwards
you can pass it on to others. ---Do not expect God to illuminate you,
for he has no reason to when you have definite human means available to
you: study and work" (J. Escrivá, *The Forge*, Point 841).

Our role is also to acquire those mustard seeds of truth through our
reading, through our study---perhaps over time to become that expert,
because we\'ve dedicated ourselves to a certain area of human learning.

"We are children of God," we\'re told in *The Forge, "*bearers of the
only flame that can light up the paths of the earth for souls, of the
only brightness which can never be darkened, dimmed, or overshadowed.
---The Lord uses us as torches, to make that light shine out. Much
depends on us. If we respond, many people will remain in darkness no
longer, but will walk instead along paths that lead to eternal life" (J.
Escrivá, *The Forge*, Point 1).

We never know the impact of seed ideas on people and nations. If we try
and get familiar with those key seed ideas---'what is freedom,' for
example, 'what is human love?'---then we can plant a seed idea in our
family with our example.

A nun here in Kenya told me a few years ago about how her father, who
was a policeman from Hansborough in Dublin, was on duty in the docks
sometime in the early 1940s during the Second World War.

A ship docked there that had a number of refugees from Eastern Europe.
Many Jews. One family who didn\'t know English got off the boat thinking
it was Liverpool. The boat was destined to go to Liverpool.

Then the boat left, and they found themselves at the side of the street
in the rain. He inquired what the problem was, managed to get some
understanding out of them, and brought them home to his family, to his
house.

They lived in the front room of his house for a couple of days till he
could get them organized. He had five children.

Some Jewish community came along to help them out after a few days. One
of the children in that family was a girl who eventually became a Sister
of Mercy nun and came as a missionary to Kenya and has set up many, many
schools in difficult areas of Nairobi.

She talks about that example of her father, an ordinary policeman on
duty in Dublin in the mid-1940s, who just lived out his Christian
vocation but planted an incredible seed in the soul of his daughter.

When Pope Francis came here on a visit a few years ago, she was the one
chosen to speak to him, representing all the downtrodden of the country.
Behind it, she talks about that example of her father.

The impact of seed ideas and mustard seed examples on the life of our
family and of our children can be immense. The seed ideas and the power
of those ideas, of that body of teaching which is the social doctrine of
the Church, can also be immense.

It has been described as the greatest treasure of the Catholic Church
and one of the most unknown treasures. Not taught, not learned, not
known by so many Catholics. It has at its center the dignity of every
human person.

We can know how one idea can change an environment. G.K. Chesterton says
that "fallacies do not cease to be fallacies, just because they become
fashionable" (G. K. Chesterton, *Napolean Of Notting Hill*). The world
is full of fallacies.

The famous Roman educator Quintilian said clarity of expression lights
up the beauty of the world.

Seed ideas can be expressed with seed words and seed phrases. To explain
man\'s most elevated thoughts was the great gift of Western
philosophy\'s founding fathers, Socrates and Plato.

We see the importance of words and phrases and the importance of
building up our vocabulary in this century of communication.

We\'re told that Our Lady "kept in mind all these things carefully in
her heart" (Luke 2:19,51).

The angel Gabriel, the words of Jesus, and the events that happened in
the course of her life and vocation were like seeds that God planted in
her mind, in her heart, in her soul, which continually brought forth
immense fruit in the course of her life, a fruit that she continues to
shower upon us in her example, both in heaven and in the description of
her life here on earth.

Mary, may you help us to gather all those seeds that God has planted in
our heart, in our mind, in our soul, and help us to yield that abundant
fruit that you are hoping for from us, so that truly all the birds of
the air can come and nest in the branches that those seeds have given
rise to.

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, Saint
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*PKN*
