---
layout: homily
title: "The Eternal High Priest"
---


By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

We\'re told in the Old Testament, in the Psalms, "You are a priest
forever, after the order of Melchizedek" (Ps. 110:4).

The whole Church participates in the mission of Christ the Priest.
Through the sacraments of Christian initiation, the lay faithful
participate in Christ\'s priesthood and are rendered capable of
sanctifying the world through secular affairs.

This is what the Second Vatican Council has called the common or
universal priesthood of the faithful (Vatican II, *Lumen gentium*, Point
10, November 21, 1964; *Catechism of the Catholic Church*, Point 1647).

Priests, ordained ministers, in a way that is different in essence and
not just in degree, also participate in Christ\'s priesthood and are
constituted as mediators between God and man, especially through the
Sacrifice of the Mass, which they carry out in the person of Christ.

Jesus Christ is High Priest forever. The Epistle to the Hebrews gives us
a precise definition of the priesthood when it tells us that "every high
priest chosen from among men is appointed to act on behalf of men in
relation to God, to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins" (Heb. 5:1).

The priest, who is a mediator between God and man, is intimately
connected with the sacrifice he offers; this is the principal act of
worship whereby man adores his Creator.

The Old Testament sacrifices were offerings made to God in recognition
of His sovereignty and in thanksgiving for favors received.

The act of total or partial destruction of the victim on the altar was a
symbol and image of the authentic sacrifice which, in the fullness of
time, Christ was to offer on Calvary.

Jesus, being made High Priest forever, offered himself to God as a most
pleasing victim of infinite value. He willed to be at one and the same
time "the Priest, the Altar, and the \[Lamb of sacrifice\]" (Roman
Missal, *Easter Preface* V).

On Calvary, Jesus the High Priest made a most acceptable offering of
praise and thanksgiving to God: "it was so perfect that none greater can
be thought of" (Thomas Aquinas, *Summa Theologiae*, Part III, Question
48).

That sacrifice was also a supreme act of atonement for our sins. St.
Thomas liked to say that one drop of Christ\'s Blood would have been
sufficient to redeem all the sins of mankind (Thomas Aquinas, Prayer,
*Adoro te Devote*).

Christ\'s petition on the Cross was heard most readily by His Father.
Now, in heaven, "He always lives to make intercession for them," as
we\'re told in the Letter to the Hebrews (Heb. 7:25).

Pope Pius XII, in his very beautiful encyclical *Mediator Dei,* has
said, "Christ is priest indeed, but he is priest for us, not for
himself. It is in the name of the whole human race that he offers
prayers and acts of religious homage to the Eternal Father.

"He is likewise victim; but victim for us, since he substitutes himself
for guilty mankind. The Apostle's exhortation, 'Have this mind among
yourselves, which was in Christ Jesus' (Phil. 2:5), requires all
Christians, so far as human power allows, to reproduce in themselves the
sentiments that Christ had when He was offering himself in
sacrifice---sentiments of humility, of adoration, praise, and
thanksgiving to the divine Majesty.

"It requires them also," he says, "to become victims, as it were;
cultivating a spirit of self-denial according to the precepts of the
Gospel, willingly doing works of penance, detesting and atoning for
their sins" (Pius XII, Encyclical, *Mediator Dei*, Point 81, November
20, 1947).

What Pope Pius XII explains here, really, is what\'s called the virtue
of priestly soul, which means having the same sentiments as Christ on
the Cross when we do our daily work, when we fulfill our family
obligations, when we\'re resting or playing sport, or when some
challenge or contradiction or cross or difficulty comes along.
Sentiments of humility, of adoration, of thanksgiving.

The Second Vatican Council has liked to say that all Christians have a
priestly soul (cf. Vatican II, *Lumen gentium*, Point 31, November 21,
1964).

Blessed Álvaro del Portillo has said the whole Church participates in
the redemptive mission of Christ the priest, "which is entrusted to all
the members of the people of God, who, through the sacraments of
initiation, have been made sharers in the priesthood of Christ, to offer
to God a spiritual sacrifice and bear witness to Christ before man"
(Álvaro del Portillo, *On Priesthood*).

We share in that mission of Christ the Priest because of our Baptism.
We\'re marked with a seal, a seal that gives us a participation in that
priesthood (cf. *Catechism of the Catholic Church*, Points 1268, 1273).

All the lay faithful participate in Christ\'s priesthood, although in a
manner which is different from that of priests, not only in degree, but
essentially.

With a truly priestly soul, they sanctify the world through the perfect
exercise of their secular activities, seeking in everything the glory of
God.

The mother who clears away the breakfast table or goes upstairs to make
beds, or plans her family activities; or the father who drives his kids
to school; or the student who does his homework or fulfills some
obligation in class---all these things can be part of living out that
priestly virtue---the housewife, through her domestic duties; or an army
officer, by demonstrating his patriotism, principally through the
cultivation of the military virtues; or the businessman improving his
company\'s situation and promoting social justice.

In this way, all of them, offering their lives and their work through
the Mass, make daily atonement for the sins of the world.

The document of the Council about priests, *Presbyterorum ordinis,* said
that priests and bishops have been expressly called by God, "not in
order that they should be separated from the people or from any man, but
that they should be completely consecrated to the task 'for which God
chooses them' (cf. Acts 13:2).

"They could not be the servants of Christ unless they were witnesses to,
and dispensers of, a life other than that of this earth. On the other
hand, they would be powerless to serve men if they remained aloof from
their life and circumstances" (Vatican II, *Presbyterorum ordinis*,
Point 3).

The priest has been chosen from among men to be invested with a dignity
that astounds even the angels, and then sent back to men to serve them
in relation to God with a unique and special salvific mission.

The priest repeatedly takes the place of Christ on earth: he has
received Christ\'s power to forgive sins, he teaches men the way to
heaven, and above all, he lends his hands and his voice to Christ in the
most sublime moment of the Mass.

In the Sacrifice of the Altar, he consecrates in the person of Christ,
taking Christ\'s place. There is no dignity comparable to that of the
priest. "Only the divine maternity of Mary is superior to this divine
ministry" (Réginald Garrigou-Lagrange, *The Priest in Union with
Christ*).

The priesthood is a marvelous gift which God has given to His Church.
St. Josemaría, in a homily called *In Love with the Church*, says, "The
priest is a direct and daily instrument of the saving grace which God
has won for us."

That's one of the reasons why we have to pray for priests. St. Josemaría
indicated three specific days in the course of the year when we could
particularly pray for all the priests of the world: on Holy Thursday,
the institution of the priesthood; on June 25, the anniversary of the
ordination of the first three priests of Opus Dei; and on August 4, the
Feast of the Curé of Ars, St. Jean Mary Vianney, who is the patron saint
of all parish priests.

"If we think about these ideas in our prayer, then we\'ll never think of
the priesthood in terms of renunciation. It is a gain, an incalculable
gain. Our Mother Mary, the holiest of creatures---only God is
holier---brought Jesus Christ into the world just once; priests bring
him on earth, to our soul and body, every day. Christ comes to be our
food, to give us life, to be, even now, a pledge, a promise, of future
life" (cf. Josemaría Escrivá, *In Love with the Church*, Point 39).

It\'s a good time in our prayer to thank Our Lord for this great gift.
Thank you, Lord, for the invitations to the priesthood that you
constantly issue to men.

On our part, we could make the resolution of dealing with priests ever
more lovingly and reverently, seeing them as Christ who is passing by,
and who bring us the most marvelous gifts we can desire. What they bring
us ultimately is eternal life.

St. John Chrysostom in his homilies on the priesthood was very conscious
of the dignity and responsibility of the priesthood.

He at first resisted the idea of being ordained, and justified his
behavior, saying, "If the captain of a great ship, with a big crew full
of oarsmen and laden with precious merchandise, ordered me to take the
tiller and cross the Aegean or the Tyrrhenian Sea, my first reaction
would be to resist. If I were asked why, I would immediately reply:
because I don\'t want the vessel to sink" (John Chrysostom, *On
Priesthood*).

But, as the saint appreciated well, Christ is always close to the
priest, close to the ship. And it\'s His will that priests would
continually feel supported by the esteem and the prayer of all the
Church\'s faithful.

The Second Vatican Council says, "They should treat them with filial
love as being their fathers and pastors. They should share also their
priests' anxieties and help them as far as possible by prayer and active
work so that they may be better able to overcome difficulties and carry
out their duties with greater success" (Vatican II, *Presbyterorum
ordinis*, Point 9).

What the faithful require of their priests is that they would be always
exemplary and base their efficacy on prayer, that they would celebrate
the Holy Mass lovingly, and that they would care for God\'s holy things
with the consideration and respect that they deserve, that they would
visit the sick and attach great importance to catechesis, that they
would always retain the joy which is born of self-surrender, and which
is so helpful even to those who are separated from God.

Our Lord, who is present among us in many ways, is particularly present
in the person of the priest. Each priest is a gift of God to the world.
He is Jesus who goes about doing good. He cures illnesses. He brings
peace and joy to men\'s minds.

The Second Vatican Council says he is the "living instrument of Christ
in the world" (*Ibid*., Point 12).

He offers Our Lord "his voice, his hands, his whole being" (J. Escrivá,
*In Love with* *the Church*, Point 39). At Mass, he renews in the person
of Christ the redemptive Sacrifice of Calvary itself. He makes Christ\'s
Redemption present and effective within history.

Pope St. John Paul, when speaking to the clergy of Brazil, said, "Jesus
identifies himself with us in such a way in carrying out the powers he
conferred upon us, that it is as if our personality disappears before
his, since it is he himself who acts through us. ... 'It is Christ
who...changes the substance of bread and wine into his Body and Blood at
Mass' (J. Escrivá, *In Love with the Church*, Point 39). And it is Jesus
himself who, in the sacrament of Penance, utters the authoritative and
fatherly words: 'Your sins are forgiven' (Matt. 9:2).

"It is he who speaks when the priest, carrying out his ministry in the
name and in the spirit of the Church, announces the Word of God.

"It is Christ himself who cares for the sick, for children and sinners,
when he enfolds them with the love and pastoral care of the sacred
ministries" (John Paul II, *Homily*, July 2, 1980).

That\'s one of the reasons why we also have to pray constantly for the
holiness of priests, helping them and sustaining them with our prayer
and affection, and seeing Christ Himself in them.

Our Lord selected the apostles, not only as messengers, prophets, and
witnesses, but also as His own representatives. Their new identity to
act in the person of Christ needs to be expressed in a life which is
simple and austere, a holiness which inspires a wholehearted dedication
to the welfare of others.

Our Lord told them to take a staff for their journey, but nothing else:
"no bread, no haversack, no money in their wallets" (cf. Mark 6:8).

God takes possession of the man He calls to the priesthood and
consecrates him to the service of his fellow men, and bestows upon him a
new personality.

Once he has been chosen and consecrated to the service of God and
others, he\'s not just a priest at certain moments only, like when he\'s
carrying out sacred functions.

"He is a priest always and at every moment," says one author, "whether
he is performing the highest and most sublime office or the most vulgar
and humble action of his ordinary life.

"Just as a Christian cannot leave aside the fact that he is a new man,
that Baptism has given him a particular character, and act 'as if' he
were just a man purely and simply, neither can the priest leave aside
his priestly character and behave 'as if' he were not a priest.

"Whatever he does, whatever attitude he adopts, whether he likes it or
not, it will always be the action or the attitude of a priest, because
he is a priest always and at all times down to the very depths of his
being, whatever he may do or whatever he may think" (Federico Suarez,
*About Being a Priest*).

The priest is a messenger from God to the world, sent to announce to
mankind its salvation, and is constituted a steward of the mysteries of
God (1 Cor. 4:1).

These mysteries include the Body and Blood of Christ, which he offers
the faithful at Mass and at Holy Communion; the grace of God in the
sacraments; and the divine Word which he utters in preaching, in
catechesis, and in Confession.

To the priest has been confided the most divine of divine works, the
salvation of souls. He has been made an ambassador and a mediator
between God and men.

In the Preface of the Mass of Our Lord Jesus Christ, the Eternal High
Priest, it says, "In him the Father has been well pleased from before
all time. As Mediator between God and human beings, fulfilling his
Father\'s will, he sacrificed himself once on the altar of the Cross as
a saving victim for the whole world.

"Thus, instituting the pattern of an everlasting sacrifice, with a
brother\'s kindness he chose, from among the children of Adam, men to
augment the priesthood, so that, from the sacrifice continually renewed
in the Church, streams of divine power might flow, whereby a new heaven
and a new earth might be made, and throughout the whole universe there
would be perfected what no eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor has it
entered into the human heart."

We can turn to Our Lady, who gave birth to the Eternal High Priest; she,
who is the Mother of Priests.

We could ask her to give strength to all priests, and that the words of
the Psalm might be always on our lips: "How can I repay the Lord for his
goodness to me? The cup of salvation I will raise; I will call on the
Lord\'s name" (Ps. 116:12-13).

The tree of the Cross is full with fruits. Suffering can help us to
become more detached from the things of this earth, such as physical
health.

Trials and tribulations offer us a chance to make reparation for our
past faults and sins. St. Augustine teaches that on such occasions, Our
Lord, the Eternal High Priest, comes to us like a physician to heal the
wounds left by our sins. Tribulation is the divine medicine (St.
Augustine, *Commentary on the Psalms*).

Suffering can move us to have recourse to the divine mercy. Our Lord
said through the lips of the prophet Hosea: "Come, let us return to the
Lord; for he has torn, that he may heal us" (Hos 6:1).

Our Lord Himself invites us and urges us to rely on Him in times of
trial: "Come to me, all you who labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest" (Matt. 11:28).

Truly Christ, the Eternal High Priest, is "our refuge and our
strength"---words taken from the Psalms (Ps 46:1). In the midst of
life\'s tempests, Christ is our one safe harbor.

Contradictions, sickness, and pain challenge us to acquire and live many
virtues such as faith, fortitude, cheerfulness, humility, docility to
the divine Will.

Countering these problems allows us to earn a great deal of supernatural
merit, all merit coming ultimately from the Eternal High Priest.

St. Josemaría in the *Furrow*, Point 997, says, "When you think of all
the things in your life which remain worthless for not having been
offered to God, you should act like a miser, anxious to get hold of
every opportunity you can and to make use of every suffering. ---For if
suffering is always there for us poor creatures, what can it be but
stupidity to waste it?"

There may be times in our life when there is no shortage of such
opportunities. But Christ the High Priest gives us the opportunity to
convert all those things into spiritual goods.

Sorrow that is borne with a Christian spirit is a wonderful road to
holiness. Our interior life virtually needs contradictions and obstacles
if it is to prosper.

St. Alphonsus stated that just as a fire needs contact with air, so does
the soul require tribulation if it is to be perfected (Alphonsus
Liguori, *Abbreviated Sermons*).

Even temptations can serve to renew our love for the Lord.

St. Paul in the Letter to the Corinthians says, "No temptation has
overtaken you that is not common to man. God is faithful, and he will
not let you be tempted beyond your strength, but with the temptation
will also provide the way of escape, that you may be able to endure it"
(1 Cor. 10:13). Any trial that is borne with the Lord\'s help will bring
us added blessings.

Whenever we are beset with difficulties we can look to Jesus, the High
Priest on the Cross. The Psalmist says, "In my distress, I cry to the
Lord, that he may answer me (Ps. 120:1).

"For we are powerless against this great multitude that is coming
against us. We do not know what to do, but our eyes are upon you" (2
Chron. 20:12).

We\'ll always find peace and strength in the merciful Heart of Christ.
Let us not be the ones to hear that tender rebuke of the Master: "O man
of little faith, why did you doubt?" (Matt 14:31).

St. Teresa of Ávila once said, "O God! What little power has the
strongest opposition when you, Lord, are pleased to bestow courage"
(Teresa of Ávila, *Foundations*).

We can ask Our Lord for that courage when we are brought up against
suffering and trial. Our Lady will teach us how to bring fruit from
difficulty.

"*Cor Mariae perdolentis, miserere nobis*!" we're told in *Furrow*,
Point 258. "Invoke the heart of Holy Mary with the purpose and
determination of uniting yourself to her sorrow,"---her priestly soul
beside the priestly soul of the Eternal High Priest---\"in reparation
for your sins and the sins of men of all times.

"And pray to her," St. Josemaría says, "---for every soul---that her
sorrow may increase in us our aversion to sin, and that we may be able
to love the physical or moral contradictions of each day as a means of
expiation."

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, Saint
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*UI*
