---
layout: homily
title: "Emmaus"
---

By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

"Now that very same day, two of them were on their way to a village
called Emmaus, seven miles from Jerusalem, and they were talking
together about all that had happened. It happened that as they were
talking together and discussing it, Jesus himself came up and walked by
their side. But their eyes were prevented from recognizing him" (Luke
24:13-16).

We can imagine the scene: two men are walking, disappointed, sad,
convinced that they\'re leaving behind them the bitterness of an event
which ended badly.

All the resurrection events are amazing, but one is especially
unexpected. We might have expected Our Lord to spend the day talking
with the Apostles. That\'s what He did before the Crucifixion.

But He made the Apostles wait until evening. In the meantime, He spent
the afternoon with two men, Cleophas and his friend, who are not
mentioned anywhere else in Scripture.

That\'s why we\'re told, "On the very same day, two of them are on their
way to a village called Emmaus." And Our Lord walks with them on this
road to Emmaus.

Before Easter, these men had been full of enthusiasm. They were
convinced that these days would be decisive: their expectations met as
well with the hopes of all the people. Everybody was thinking the same.

Jesus, to whom they had entrusted their lives, seemed to have arrived at
the final battle. He would now manifest His power after a long period of
preparation and concealment. That\'s what they were expecting. But it
was not to be.

These two men were nurturing a uniquely human hope and that hope was now
falling to pieces.

The Cross that was raised on Calvary was the most eloquent sign of
defeat, which they had not foreseen. They couldn\'t have imagined the
defeat that was going to take place.

Logically going through their minds is the idea that if Jesus was truly
in accordance with God's heart, then they had to conclude that God was
unarmed, defenseless in the hands of violent people, unable to offer any
resistance to evil.

So these two men on that Sunday morning, or that Sunday afternoon, did
the 'logical thing'---they fled Jerusalem.

But the events of the Passion and the Death are still very much there in
their hearts and in their minds. Their souls bear the painful torment of
those events during the rest of the Sabbath.

That Easter, which should have inspired a song of liberation, has
instead been transformed into the most painful day of their lives. They
leave Jerusalem to go to a tranquil village that is seven miles away.

They look like people who are intent on removing a burning memory from
their minds. They\'re on the road, walking in sadness.

This scenario---the road---has already appeared in many Gospel
narratives. We\'re told in many places, "as Our Lord was walking along
the road\..." (John 1:29, Matt. 4:18, John 10:23, Luke 6:1, Mark 10:32).

So here we are again on this ordinary road. That road is becoming
increasingly more important as the history of the Church begins to
unfold.

Then Our Lord comes. Jesus Himself came up and walked by their side, but
their eyes were prevented from recognizing Him.

So many times in our life we\'re also walking along the ordinary roads
of each day, the roads of life that God has called us to walk along. Our
Lord comes and walks beside us, but we don\'t recognize Him.

That meeting of those two men with Our Lord appears to be completely by
chance. It seems to be one of those chance meetings that happen in life;
you bump into certain people.

They\'re walking deep in thought, and this stranger comes up alongside
them. It is Christ, but their eyes are not able to recognize Him. Our
Lord is following the same pattern that He did with Mary Magdalene,
slowly revealing Himself to them, little by little.

He\'s not giving them a fright; He\'s not appearing by magic; He\'s
letting them see and discover Him little by little.

You could say that Our Lord begins the 'therapy of hope'---therapy for
their discouragement, for their despair, for their sadness. What takes
place on this particular road is that therapy of hope.

Every day of our life, Our Lord wants to inject our lives with hope, so
that we flee from discouragement or despair or sadness---allies of the
enemy, instruments of the devil.

Who is it that administers this therapy? It is Christ Himself. And what
does He do? He asks and He listens.

He said to them, "What are all these things that you were discussing as
you walk along?" (Luke 24:17).

He\'s going to draw things out from them, just like He did with Mary
Magdalene: "Woman, why are you weeping? Whom do you seek?" (John 20:15).

"Then one of them called Cleophas answered him, 'You must be the only
person staying in Jerusalem who does not know the things that have been
happening there these last few days'" (John 20:18).

He seems to say to Our Lord, 'Well, where have you been? On what planet
have you been living? You seem to know nothing of what\'s been going
on.'

"But Our Lord says, 'What things?'"

Our God is not an intrusive God. He doesn\'t blast His way into our
lives. Even though Our Lord knows the reason for the disappointment of
these two men, He gives them time to deeply fathom the bitterness that
has overcome them.

Out of this, there\'s going to come a confession that could be a refrain
for the whole of human existence. "We had hoped\...but we had hoped\..."
(Luke 24:21).

"They answered all about Jesus of Nazareth, 'who showed himself a
prophet powerful in action and speech before God and all the people, and
how our own chief priests and our leaders handed him over to be
sentenced to death, and had him crucified. Our own hope had been that he
would be the one to set Israel free'" (Luke 24:19-21).

This was their hope. This is the yearning that we had, but they talk
about a human hope.

There may be many times when we find ourselves assailed by sadness, by
defeats, by all the failures that there may have been in our life. Deep
down, we\'re a little bit like those two men on the road to Emmaus. We
have our own hopes. And that is not all.

"'Two whole days have now gone by since it all happened, and some women
from our group have astounded us. They went to the tomb in the early
morning, and when they could not find the body, they came back to tell
us that they had seen a vision of angels, who declared that he was
alive'" (Luke 24:21-23).

That little piece of news from those women hasn\'t really raised their
spirits.

There may be many times when we felt that we were one step away from
happiness, only to find ourselves knocked to the ground, disappointed.
But Our Lord walks with all people who are discouraged, who are low in
spirit, who may be suffering from a passing or a chronic depression, who
walk with their heads hung low.

When He walks with them in a discreet manner, He\'s able to restore
hope.

It\'s interesting to see how researchers and physicians and the things
they say on the Internet about the treatment of acute or chronic
depression---how important the spiritual element is. Only Christ can
restore our hope.

Jesus speaks to them, and He speaks to them above all through the
Scriptures. "'Some of our friends,' they said, 'went to the tomb and
found everything exactly as the women had reported. But of him they saw
nothing'" (Luke 24:24).

Whatever little bit of human hope there might have been, as they tell
the story, they seem to come back to the fact that all is lost.

"Then he said to them, 'You foolish men, so slow to believe all that the
prophets have said!'" (Luke 24:25).

They were slow to believe the Scriptures. So Our Lord speaks to them
about the Book of Life. Those who take up God\'s Book will not encounter
an easy heroism, or fierce campaigns of conquest. True hope never comes
cheaply. It always undergoes defeat.

Often that\'s where Our Lord sows the seeds of hope. The hope of those
who do not suffer perhaps is not even hope.

God doesn\'t want to be loved as one would love a ruler who leads his
people to victory, annihilating his enemies in a bloodbath. Our God is
rather a faint light burning on a cold and windy day, and as fragile as
His presence in this world may appear, He has chosen the place that we
all disdain.

And so they reach their place where they\'re going to, and Our Lord is
about to go on. "But they press him to stay because the night is now far
gone. They say to Our Lord, 'Stay with us, Lord, for it is almost
evening'" (Luke 24:29).

These are like the key words of this whole story: Stay with us, Lord.
John Paul II has written an Apostolic Letter on the Eucharist entitled
with those very words: *Mane nobiscum Domine*--"Stay with us, Lord."
It's well worthwhile going and having a little look at it on the
Internet.

"This was the insistent invitation of the two disciples on the evening
of the day of the Resurrection, addressed to the Wayfarer who had
accompanied them on their journey" (John Paul II, *Apostolic Letter*,
*Mane nobiscum Domine*, October 7, 2004, Point 1).

There\'s something about Him. They\'re attracted to Him. There\'s
something there in their hearts, but they can\'t quite put their finger
on it. Our Lord has not yet opened their eyes to completely see who it
is that is with them.

Of course, "weighed down with sadness, they never imagined that this
stranger was none other than their Master, risen from the dead."

If we are weighed down with sadness, discouragement, despair, there are
things also that we don\'t see clearly. One great rule of life is never
to make major decisions in low moments. We don\'t have the full picture.

"Yet they felt 'their hearts burning within them as he spoke to them and
he explained the Scriptures' (cf. Luke 24:32). The light of the Word
that they heard unlocked the hardness of their hearts---hearts that have
no faith---and opened their eyes."

These days after Easter are days for the opening of eyes, for the
rediscovery of faith, for Christ penetrating deeper into our souls.

"Amid the shadows of the passing day and the darkness that clouded their
spirit, the Wayfarer brought a ray of light, and that ray of light
rekindled their hope, and it led their hearts to yearn for the fullness
of light."

Christ Himself is the light. He\'s going to bring a new light into their
lives.

Then Jesus repeats for them the fundamental gesture of every Eucharist.
He takes bread, blesses it, breaks it, and gives it. The entire history
of Our Lord seems somehow tied up in these gestures. In every Eucharist
is also the symbol of what the Church should be.

Christ takes us, blesses us, "breaks" our life---because there is no
love without sacrifice---and He offers it to others. He offers it to
everyone.

The encounter with these two on the road to Emmaus is a fleeting one.
Our Lord doesn\'t stay with them forever, but somehow the entire destiny
of the Church is contained within this fleeting meeting.

It tells us that the Christian community is not enclosed within a
fortified citadel, but rather journeys along its most essential
environment, which is the road---the ordinary road of our vocation, of
our Christian vocation in the middle of the world, in the middle of
temporal affairs.

And on that road, it encounters people with their hopes and
disappointments, which at times may be burdensome. The Church manifested
by Christ listens to everyone\'s story.

As those stories emerge from the treasure chest of their personal
conscience, He listens to them, and the Church listens to them, in order
to offer them the Word of Life, the witness of love, a love that is
faithful to the end, and thus the hearts of people reignite with hope.

In the middle of our questions, our mysteries, our difficulties, and
even our bitter disappointments, "the divine Wayfarer continues to walk
by our side, opening to us the Scriptures and leading us to a deeper
understanding of the mysteries of God."

Hence, the importance of spending a little time in silent prayer every
day, or of reading a few words of the Gospel, or spending fifteen
minutes doing some spiritual reading, giving the Holy Spirit a better
chance to be able to reveal to us the meaning of those Scriptures.

"When we meet him fully, we will pass from the light of the Word to the
light streaming from the 'Bread of life', the supreme fulfillment of his
promise to 'be with us always to the end of the age' (cf. Matt. 28:20).
'I will be with you always'" (*Ibid*., Point 2).

"Jesus described himself as the 'light of the world' (John 8:12), and
this quality clearly appears in certain moments of his life, like the
Transfiguration and the Resurrection, in which his divine glory shines
forth brightly. Yet in the Eucharist, the glory of Christ remains
veiled, hidden under the Sacred Species.

"Through the mystery of his complete hiddenness, Christ becomes a
mystery of light, thanks to which believers are led into the depths of
the divine light" (Point 11).

Just as there is a light streaming from Bethlehem and there is a light
streaming from the Cross, there is a light streaming from the Blessed
Eucharist, a light that can light up the whole of our lives.

"In the account of the disciples on the road to Emmaus, Christ
intervenes to show the story of the Scriptures, 'beginning with Moses
and all the prophets' how 'all the Scriptures; point to the mystery of
his person'" (Luke 24:27).

"The Redemption is the high point of the whole of human history" (John
Paul II, *Encyclical Letter, Redemptor Hominis*, March 4, 1979). God,
instead of just speaking to man, becomes man. Revelation is personified
in the person of Christ.

"His words make the hearts of the disciples 'burn' within them, drawing
them out of the darkness of sorrow and despair, and awakening in them a
desire to remain with him. And so they say: 'Stay with us, Lord'" (John
Paul II, *Apostolic Letter*, *Mane nobiscum Domine*, Point 12).

These are very appropriate words these days, or an aspiration to say to
Our Lord in the Blessed Sacrament.

"It is significant that these two disciples\...recognized him at table
through the simple gesture of the 'breaking of bread.'"

The scales fall from their eyes. Now they know who this Wayfarer is.
There may be times in our life when Our Lord reveals Himself to us in a
clearer way, when we say to ourselves: This message can only have come
from God. Or, this word or phrase that this person has said or this
child has uttered contains some divine message. The Holy Spirit is here.

"When minds are enlightened and hearts are enkindled, signs begin to
'speak'" (*Ibid*., Point 14).

I\'ve just finished reading a book called *Catholic Converts*. Some of
the major converts, particularly literary converts, high profile
converts of the past two centuries---in some of them you can see there
were definite moments when signs began to speak. The liturgy or certain
words or certain truths became clearer.

\"The Eucharist unfolds in a dynamic context of signs containing a rich
and luminous message." The liturgy of every day is full of lights and
beauties. The words---they contain something special. "Through these
signs, the mystery in some way opens up before the eyes of the believer"
(Point 14).

A priest told me once how he was going to say Mass for some nuns in
Ireland. He asked the nun in charge if she would like him to say a few
words during the Mass.

She replied, "Father, should the Mass have words enough of its own?" In
other words, no.

But he said, "I was very impressed with the way that you said it."

"The Mass has words enough of its own." Here was somebody who had
learned to savor the words of the liturgy---their richness, their
beauty, their light.

"When the disciples on the way to Emmaus asked Jesus to stay 'with'
them, he responded by giving them a much greater gift: through the
Sacrament of the Eucharist he found a way to stay 'in' them" (Point 19).

We would like to take a little more care of your moments of thanksgiving
after Mass. Let it be very intimate. We discover every day the great
treasure it is to have God within us, the great privilege, the great
grace.

"Receiving the Eucharist means entering into a profound union with
Jesus. 'Abide in me and I in you' (John 15:4). This relationship of
profound and ritual 'abiding' enables us to have a certain foretaste of
heaven on earth. This is the greatest of human yearnings. This is what
God had in mind when he brought about his plan of salvation in history.

"God has placed in human hearts a 'hunger' for his word (cf. Amos 8:11),
a hunger that can only be satisfied by full union with him. Our
Communions are given so that we might be satisfied with God here on
earth, in expectation of our complete fulfillment in heaven" (Point 19).

"Whoever eats my body and drinks my blood shall have life in him, and I
will raise him up on the last day" (John 6:54).

So with the Blessed Eucharist we get a promise of eternal life,
something very great, and so we can ask Our Lord to enkindle that hope
in us.

"The Eucharist is not just an expression of our unity in the life of the
Church; it is also a project of solidarity for all of humanity. In the
Eucharist the Church constantly renews our awareness of being a 'sign
and instrument' not only of intimate union with God but also of the
unity of the whole human race."

God has brought us together in love. He wants us to be united with the
whole human race there.

"When we take part in the Blessed Eucharist we learn to become a
promoter of peace and of solidarity and of joy in every situation"
(Point 27).

"In the Eucharist our God has shown us love in the extreme, overcoming
all those criteria of power which too often govern human relations and
radically affirming the criterion of service. 'If anyone would be first,
he must be last of all and servant of all'" (Mark 9:35).

When He institutes the Eucharist Our Lord also washes feet (John
13:1-20). "By bending down to wash the feet of the disciples, he
explains the meaning of the Eucharist" (Point 28).

Our Lord invites us to delight in His presence. There must be a special
joy in our soul, in our heart, when we receive Him each day, as we
become aware or remind ourselves---because we need reminding---of the
incomparable treasure which Christ has entrusted to His Church.

With the disciples on the road to Emmaus, we also feel that same need to
say: 'Stay with us, Lord, stay with me, now and always.'

If I have any difficult moments, any dark moments, in which I walk with
a little bit of sadness, pensive, without horizons, help me to remember
that you\'re always there beside me to give me hope, to warm our heart,
to say, 'Go ahead, I\'m with you. Carry on.'

"The secret of the road that leads to Emmaus is simply that despite
appearances to the contrary, we continue to be loved and God will never
stop loving us. God will walk with us always, even in the most painful
moments, even in the worst moments, the moments of our greatest defeats"
(Pope Francis, *General Audience*, May 24, 2017).

Somebody sent me a nice photo of St. John Chrysostom recently saying
that "we can be at peace, because forgiveness has arisen." Great message
of Easter: forgiveness has arisen.

Christ has come to forgive, to help us to begin again, just like those
disciples on the road to Emmaus. This is our hope---a call to go forward
in hope, because He is beside us and walks with us always.

Our Lady was our hope, the Mother of Hope. She kept the hope of the
Apostles and the disciples going through the period of Holy Saturday.

Now she\'s bringing them back together again little by little. She\'s
going to keep them together until the coming of the Holy Spirit.

Woman of Hope, may you help us to say frequently to Our Lord in the
Blessed Sacrament: 'Stay with us, Lord.'

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, Saint
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*OLV*
