---
layout: homily
title: "The Sacred Heart of Jesus"
---


By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

"When they came to Jesus, they saw that he was already dead, and so
instead of breaking his legs, one of the soldiers pierced his side with
a lance; and immediately there came out blood and water" (John
19:33-34).

Today we celebrate the Feast of the Sacred Heart of Jesus.

Our Lord allowed His Heart to be pierced by a lance, and this wound was
opened up, from which flowed blood and water, a symbol of the
sacramental life of the Church, which Pope Pius XII would like to call
"a fountain of living water" (Pius XII, Encyclical, *Haurietis aquas,*
May 15, 1956).

Something flows from the side of Christ, from His Heart, into our heart,
and gives rise to spiritual life or interior life. That thing which
flows is love.

This feast celebrates in a special way the love of God for man, the love
of Christ for man. "For God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son" (John 3:16), and He gave Him on the Cross.

He has a Heart that is willing to be on the Cross. Christ teaches us
that authentic love is sacrificial love.

Modern culture often tries to tell us that love is feeling. 'Taste the
feeling.' 'Feel the feeling.' But Christ on the Cross did not say, 'You
can\'t beat this feeling.'

He must have felt awful, but yet He has told us, "Greater love than this
no man has, that he is willing to lay down his life for his friends"
(John 15:13).

Christ allowed His Heart to be broken on the Cross, as though to become
the patron saint of all broken hearts, with Our Lady.

Fulton Sheen likes to say that if ever God allows hearts to be broken,
it\'s because He wants to enter into them a little more (cf. Fulton J.
Sheen, *Through the Year: Inspirational Readings*).

There\'s always some great divine purpose or some great apostolic
purpose. Christ on the Cross with His wounded Heart teaches us the
meaning of love and invites everyone with a pain in their heart to enter
into the wounds of Christ Crucified, to enter into the Heart of Christ,
and there find consolation and joy, because the Holy Spirit is in the
wounds of Christ.

Love is there. It\'s to the Heart of Christ that we\'re invited to go to
receive consolation, strength, meaning.

We\'re invited to be very intimate with the Heart of Christ, and also to
atone to that Heart for all the ways in which that Heart is offended
through sin in the world.

The passage continues in St. John, "This is the evidence of one who saw
it---true evidence, and he knows that what he says is true---and he
gives it so that you may believe as well" (John 19:35).

St. John includes this line here, as though emphasizing the point. Those
who were there saw this happening, and little by little, have come to
realize its significance.

Something very important has just happened, says St. John. "True
evidence, and he knows that what he says is true." He emphasizes the
point.

"Because all this happened," Scripture continues, "to fulfill the words
of Scripture: Not one bone of his will be broken; and again, in another
place...: They will look to the one whom they have pierced" (John
19:36-37).

We\'re invited today to "look to the one whom they have pierced"---to
contemplate the wounded Heart of Christ and to learn many things from
that wounded Heart.

There\'s a place in that Heart for every human person. In the Entrance
Antiphon of today\'s Mass, it says, "The thoughts of His Heart last
through every generation" (Ps. 33:11).

The Heart of Christ has something to say to the whole of humanity.

In the Communion Antiphon, it says, "If anyone is thirsty, let him come
to me and drink" (John 7:37).

We\'re invited to go close to that Sacred Heart "to draw water in joy
from the wells of salvation" (Isa. 12:3) and ultimately, to learn the
real meaning of human love---human love, which is a reflection of divine
love; human love, which is the most beautiful reality on the planet.

At the end of his life, St. Augustine was to say, "Late have I loved
you" (St. Augustine, *The Confessions* X, 27), a famous phrase that has
come down through us through the centuries. "Late have I loved you."

The whole purpose of our Christian vocation is love---that we put love
into practice in our family, in our work, and our social relations---in
everything that we do. Because "God is love" (1 John 4:8, 16), because
the Church is love.

It\'s on the Cross of Christ with His wounded Heart that we learn the
meaning of that word.

When Our Lord appeared to St. Margaret Mary, He said, "Behold this Heart
which has loved men so much" (Robert Stackpole, *Jesus, Mercy
Incarnate*)*.* Behold this Heart, look at this Heart.

He said, "What do I get in return? Nothing but insults. And it is those
who are consecrated to me that often give me the greatest pain."

Those words of Our Lord can lead us to grow in our spirit of atonement,
to say sorry to the Heart of Christ and to make up to that Heart for all
the times that we ourselves have offended that Heart through our own
personal negligence.

In *The Forge*, St. Josemaría says, "My Lord Jesus has a Heart more
tender than the hearts of all good men put together. If a good man (of
average goodness) knew that a certain person loved him, without seeking
personal satisfaction or reward of any kind (he loves for love's sake);
and if he also knew that all this person wanted from him was that he
should not object to being loved, even from afar...then it would not be
long before he responded to such a disinterested love.

"---If the Loved One is so powerful that he can do all things, I am sure
that, as well as surrendering in the end to the faithful love of a
created being (in spite of the wretchedness of that poor soul), he will
give this lover the supernatural beauty, knowledge, and power he needs
so that the eyes of Jesus are not sullied when he gazes upon the poor
heart that is adoring him. ---Love, my child, love and await" (Josemaría
Escriva, *The Forge*, Point 298).

We know that "God is love" and love is also a mystery. We\'re always
discovering new aspects of that mystery, new facets of the jewel of the
Heart of Christ as we look at it from different optical angles.

Devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus is a deep approach to the
mysteries of Our Lord. We pledge our allegiance to a certain optical
angle.

John Paul II liked to say that something so essential is experienced in
devotion to the Sacred Heart that it will endure throughout the
centuries.

St. Paul says to the Ephesians, "I, who am less than the least of all
God\'s holy people, have been entrusted with this special grace, of
proclaiming to the Gentiles the unfathomable treasures of Christ and of
throwing light on the inner workings of the mystery kept hidden through
all the ages in God, the Creator of everything" (Eph. 3:8-9).

We have received this great legacy, the legacy of the unfathomable
riches of the treasure of Christ.

Lord, help me to appreciate that mystery, to delve a little more into
your Sacred Heart so that I can be a more loving person and show that
love in concrete ways, and in that way reflect my God, who is love.

To the Ephesians, in another place, he says, "This, then, is what I
pray, kneeling before the Father, from whom every fatherhood, in heaven
or on earth, takes its name.

"In the abundance of his glory may he, through his Spirit, enable you to
grow firm in power with regard to your inner self, so that Christ may
live in your hearts through faith, and then, planted in love and built
on love, with all God\'s holy people you will have the strength to grasp
the breadth and the length, the height and the depth; so that, knowing
the love of Christ, which is beyond knowledge, you may be filled with
the utter fullness of God" (Eph. 3:14-19).

Down through the centuries in Scripture, there\'s always been a great
emphasis on the importance of the heart. Our religion is a religion of
the heart.

We\'re told, "God does not look at the outer appearance, but God looks
at the heart" (1 Sam. 16:7).

These are messages to us to take very good care of our heart; not let
our heart run away with ourselves or get attached to all sorts of silly
material things.

We\'re told, "Seek for the things that are above, not things that are
below" (Col. 3:2).

Our Lord has also warned us that "out of the human heart come all sorts
of evil, ugly things: anger, pride, lust, jealousy, envy (cf. Mark
7:22).

He wants us to get all of those things out of our heart through the
Sacrament of Confession and in spiritual direction, so that He can fill
our hearts with love.

With the Psalmist, we can say, "Create a clean heart in me, O God" (Ps.
51:10). Purify my heart.

"Rend your heart and not your garments" (Joel 2:13). In the Book of
Ezekiel: "I will take out your heart of stone and give you a heart of
flesh" (Ezek. 36:26).

The Beatitudes are directives for right dispositions of the heart.
"Blessed are the peacemakers" (Matt. 5:9). "Blessed are those who hunger
and thirst for righteousness" (Matt. 5:6).

We're told that the quality of our prayer is measured by the heart. "Go
into your room in secret, and your Father who sees in secret will reward
you" (Matt. 6:6).

Almsgiving and its benefits or goodness is measured not by the amount,
but by the intention. This poor widow put in all that she had to live on
(Mark 12:41-44). The amount was not what was important. The importance
was the spirit with which it was given.

St. John is often called the Saint of the Sacred Heart because he rested
in the bosom of Christ (John 13:23). We have many reasons then to love
this particular feast day, to make resolutions to purify our own hearts
and thank God for the purifications that He may send to our hearts---the
pains, the aches.

If ever God allows your heart to be broken, it may be that down the road
a little bit, a few months, a few years, He\'ll bring some other soul in
contact with you who also has a broken heart, and you will learn from
that experience.

You\'ll help them to be able to see the hand of God working there and
maybe, help those people to have recourse to the Heart of Christ to find
their peace and serenity.

Pope Pius XII liked to say that "streams of living water shall flow from
His Heart" (Pius XII, Encyclical, *Haurietis aquas*--On Devotion to the
Sacred Heart, May 15, 1956, quoting John 7:38).

Water flows from inside of Christ to inside of each one of us and gives
rise to new life. "If you do not eat the flesh of the Son of man and
drink his blood, you have no life in you" (John 6:53).

Isaiah says, "Joyfully you will draw water from the springs of
salvation" (Isa.12:3). It\'s there we find our peace and our serenity.

I was coming back from a retreat one time in Macau, passing through Hong
Kong airport. I was changing the last piece of Hong Kong currency into
Singapore currency where I was going.

Suddenly, I felt somebody at my left elbow. There was a guy who was
looking over my shoulder.

I got the impression he was looking to see how much money I had so that
he would know how much to ask for.

I felt a bit got at. I felt this wasn\'t fair. This guy\'s a real
professional. When you\'re a priest dressed as a priest and traveling,
you\'re a target for people like this.

When I turned around from that counter, the thoughts going through my
mind were not very priestly. This guy was standing there, and the first
thing he says to me is, "Are you a man of God?"

I was thinking, 'Oh, my goodness, no! Emotional blackmail. This guy
knows how to squeeze it out of you.'

Then he said, "Do you mind if I ask you a question?" I was thinking, 'I
wonder, is it five, is it ten, is it the whole twenty?' I could see
myself walking home that night. And I said, "No."

He said, "Why is love so painful?" Another unusual question to be asked
at Hong Kong airport when you\'re rushing for a plane. Here was this
27-year-old guy asking, "Why is love so painful?"

He explained that he had married a girl from mainland China. He had
lived in Taiwan for two years. He had smothered her with love, but now
she had run back off to China.

He came to look for her; he couldn\'t find her. He said, "I can\'t sleep
at night. I\'m going nuts!"

Then he sees this man of God dressed in black and decides to ask him the
question.

I asked him if he ever heard of Jesus Christ. He might have had
some---he was from a Muslim background---but he might have had some
Italian grandmother in Seattle who might have been a Catholic. It was
all very complex.

But he was a real live 27-year-old guy with a broken heart. I think I
learned more from the encounter than he did.

The world is full of broken hearts, people who are looking for help to
mend their broken hearts. Broken hearts can only be mended in Christ.

We are there as followers of Christ to bring Him to other people, to
help those "streams of living water" to flow, so as to bring people a
new peace in their hearts, a new joy, a new serenity---the joy and the
serenity of authentic love that comes from divine love, which is meant
to lead us eventually to the eternal wedding feast. Happiness forever,
with eternal love. It\'s for that that we have been made.

Pope St. John Paul II said this devotion to the Sacred Heart tries to
reach out to the inner mystery of man because the heart is a symbol of
one\'s intimate personality. It\'s the innermost part of a person\'s
being.

When we look at Jesus through the optical angle of the heart, we look at
Christ from within. We enter His inner works. We try to understand why
He did what He did.

What is in the Heart of Christ? We learn the "why" of Christ. Strictly
speaking, we don\'t need to go to the Holy Land or do Bible quizzes or
other things. We just need to discover what is in that Heart.

What is in that Heart but love? The Heart of Christ makes the word
"love" meaningful. Sacrificial love. A willingness to be on the Cross.

Therefore, the Sacred Heart of Christ has a message for every father of
a family, for every mother of a family, for every sibling, for every
person in the world. It\'s like a summary of our faith. It\'s the love
of God for man unto death.

Christ could have said, 'Your sins are forgiven you' or clicked His
fingers. He could have redeemed us in all sorts of ways.

But if He had not died on the Cross in the way that He did, if He did
not allow His Heart to be pierced by a lance, we could not have
experienced the depth of His love.

On the Cross, we see Christ\'s love for His Father. It\'s an atoning
love. "Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing"
(Luke 23:34).

In the Preface of the Sacred Heart that we say today, we read, "From His
wounded side flowed blood and water, the fountain of sacramental life in
the Church. To His open side, the Savior invites all men to draw water
in joy from the wells of salvation" (Preface, *Roman Missal*).

We can thank God today that we know these truths, that we know Christ.
We know the answers. We have all the truth. We have all the
answers---not like that fellow that I met in that airport in Hong Kong.

There are so many people in the world that don\'t have the answers, that
don\'t know the truth. We have a great obligation to try and inform
other people about the sacraments, the pathway to the Heart of Christ,
as we are born from grace and therefore we can say, *Abba*, Father,
"Come, Father."

We have a "new life in the Spirit" (Rom. 8:1-11; 2 Cor. 5:17). We have a
new commandment, which is, "Love one another" (John 13:34), and this
comes from the driving force of the Holy Spirit, "who pours that love
into our hearts" (Rom. 5:5). It comes from the Heart of Christ.

The bottom line of the Sacred Heart devotion is that "God is love" (1
John 4:8, 16). Even if He had not redeemed us, He would still have been
love.

What is glorious about the Cross? Love is glorious, and this was seen by
"the good thief" (Luke 23:40-43) and by the centurion. We\'re told in
St. Luke that when the centurion saw what had taken place, "He gave
praise to God and said, 'Truly, this was an upright man!'" (Luke 23:47).

Even in His dying moments, Our Lord attracted souls to Him.

The Cross is not just tragic, it\'s also splendid. Chesterton says that
the joy of Christ on the Cross is missing in all the accounts of the
Cross (G.K. Chesterton, *Orthodoxy*)---the joy of knowing that His love
would triumph. Optimism.

The whole of Creation stands before this God in awe. "They will look to
the one whom they have pierced" (John 19:37; Zech. 12:10).

Our focus on the Sacred Heart of Christ fosters a Christ-centered
relationship. Mother Teresa liked to say that we have to have a tender
love for Christ.

Our spiritual life must lead us to a living, personal relationship with
Jesus. If that\'s not the case, then we\'re lost. Everything is directed
towards that.

Our religion is not a religion of the book, not even of the Bible. It\'s
not a series of ceremonies. The Sacred Heart helps us to develop this
living relationship with Our Lord.

We live in union with Christ. This doctrine is not abstract anymore; it
becomes alive. It forces us to have a deeply personal image of Christ.

St. Thomas Aquinas says, "We can\'t grasp what God is, only what He is
not" (Thomas Aquinas, *Summa Theologiae*, I.I. Question 3).

We are born into a philosophy of an immutable, un-suffering image of
Christ. God is immutable and cannot change, but He\'s not static. He\'s
very dynamic.

He may be un-sufferable, but not insensitive. We can think and see that
God also has feelings or something like feelings. His Heart can be hurt
by our negligence, by our turning our back on Him, by our shouts of
crucifying Him (Matt. 27:22-23).

He uses this Heart to reach out to us in tenderness and devotion, in the
deeply personal mode of the heart.

We could also say that the Heart of Christ tells us something that
surpasses philosophy---that God has a Heart.

Even if we know no philosophy or no theology, we can still know the
Heart of God. He\'s a God of love and love is His ultimate definition.

To anyone who seems to suffer, as many do today, from low self-esteem,
we can tell them if they feel unloved or if they feel they\'re on the
lowest rung of the universe, that "you are a lovable reality."

"You\'re carried in the palm of a God who loves you" (cf. Isa.4 9:16).

There\'s a great modern need for the Sacred Heart. Once people feel
loved by God, they feel the need to respond to God in love.

Some might look at God as a cow. People love God for what He gives, not
for what He is.

If we love God only for the cookies that He gives us, then that\'s the
love of a dog. If we love God only because of His power, that\'s the
love of a slave. If we love God only because of a dull sense of duty,
that\'s the love of a servant.

But Our Lord has said, "I shall no longer call you servants, because a
servant does not know his master\'s business, but I have called you
friends" (John 15:15). We\'re invited to have that deep personal
relationship of love with Jesus.

In *The Forge*, St. Josemaría says, "Lord, make me so much yours that
not even the holiest affections may enter my heart except through your
wounded Heart" (J. Escrivá, *The Forge*, Point 98).

We can feel sorry that God is loved so little. We can see that we need
to outdo ourselves in love in some concrete way.

We need to make atonement to the Heart of Christ---to say we\'re sorry.
Restoring glory to God in the world is a much wider idea than just
reparation. We\'ve got to place Christ on the top of all human
activities. This is part of reparation.

If we have devotion to the Sacred Heart of Christ, hopefully it will
foster a more loving atmosphere around us, a more loving family, a more
loving society.

The world can be very impersonal, with credit cards, answering machines,
voicemails. There can be a feeling of anonymity. This can cause a lot of
pessimism in young people.

There was a song in the early 1960s by Elvis Presley that said, "I
don\'t have a wooden heart." We all---every human person has a sensitive
heart. Sometimes in modern music and poetry, the heart can be missing.
We have heavy metal, we have rock.

We need to reintroduce a culture of the heart so that we help people to
become persons again. A culture of life, the cult of beauty, a
civilization of love are all part of this.

We need to speak to people in their hearts for a convincing witness,
one-to-one, heart-to-heart.

People must feel our heart. They need to feel there\'s a heart burning
in us for our faith; and when people see this, they love it, because
that\'s what they need.

In the Feast of the Seven Sorrows of Our Lady, in the Sequence of that
Mass, we\'re told, "Make my heart burn in loving Christ Our Lord"--*Fac,
ut ardeat cor meum, in amendo Christum Deum.*

*Ure igne Sancti Spiritus!*--"Enkindle in my heart the fire of your
love" (*Prayer to the Holy Spirit*).

St. Paul tells us about the importance of love. We could put it in
modern parlance---we could say we may play for Chelsea and score the
winning goal; we might win presidential elections or gold medals in
Olympics or marathons. We might get a green card to visit the USA or
study at an Ivy League or Harvard. "But if we lack love, we are nothing"
(1 Cor. 13:2).

The Heart of Christ is like the beginning and the end of all things.

We could turn to Our Lady. A pathway to the Heart of Christ is the Heart
of Mary. *Cor Mariae dulcissimum,* most Sweet Heart of Mary, may you
make the pathway safe and sure for my journey to that Sacred Heart of
Christ" (cf. J. Escrivá, *Christ Is Passing By*, Point 38).

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, Saint
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*GD*
