---
layout: homily
title: "God Has Captured Me With His Love"
---


By Fr. Conor Donnelly

*(Proofread)*

*Per signum Crucis, de inimicis nostris libera nos, Deus noster. In
nomine Patris, et Filii, et Spiritus Sancti. Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

"My dear friends, let us love one another, since love is from God.
Everyone who loves is a child of God and knows God. Whoever fails to
love does not know God, because God is love" (1 John 4:7-8).

These are among the most beautiful words in the whole of Scripture.
Blessed Álvaro liked to say that it was to the care of St. John that Our
Lady was entrusted and, possibly because of that, he writes more about
love than any other of the evangelists. He says some very beautiful
things.

This meditation is entitled 'God has captured me with His love.'

"My dear friends," he says also, "God has loved us so much, we too
should love one another\...God is love and whoever remains in love
remains in God, and God in him" (1 John 4:11,16).

In the Encyclical *Ecclesia de Eucharistia*, John Paul II says, "the
Church draws her life from the Eucharist."

You could also say that the Church draws her love from the Eucharist.
Each day we draw love from the Eucharist. And love is a very important
word.

The Church is all about love. Christianity is love. The sacraments are
love. The Spirit of Opus Dei is love.

Everything about our life, our Christian vocation, is all about love. "A
little act, done for Love," said St. Josemaría, "is worth so much!"
(Josemaría Escrivá, *The Way*, Point 814).

A couple of years ago I attended a 60th anniversary celebration of a
religious profession in Msongari. The 80-plus-year-old nun gave a speech
at the end, after the lunch.

She said, "You know this phrase that we often hear in parishes, 'God is
good all the time.'" She said, "I don\'t like that. I don\'t like it:
'God is good all the time.'" She said, "God is love."

Very powerful expression. It\'s the message that we have to try and
bring to the whole world.

Everything that helps to convey that message is important. We try to put
love into practice in everything we do.

"This is the revelation of God\'s love for us," says St. John, "that God
sent his only Son into the world that we might have life through him.
Love consists in this: it is not we who loved God, but God loved us and
sent his Son to expiate for our sins"(1 John 4:9-10).

In this recollection, we could ask Our Lord that we might learn how to
love a little more, how to love a little better; to become the
aristocrats of love at all stages of our life.

Around this time last year, at a birthday in Strathmore House, Father
Cormac at 94 sang a song, 'Keep Right On to the End of the Road.' It was
an old soldier song that was sung in the Second World War about
fortitude, about perseverance.

At all stages of our lives, we are called to put that love of God into
practice in concrete ways.

St. John of the Cross said, "At the end of your earthly life, you will
be judged on the greatness of your love."

Everything about our life has to do with love. Every bit of formation
that we receive, every grace, every virtue we try to put into practice,
every challenge that comes along, and every little cross is a divine
call to love a little more.

St. Ignatius said, "No wood is better able to increase the fire of
divine love than the wood of the Cross." We show Our Lord the
seriousness of our love by the way that we accept the crosses that He
may send us.

Holiness is measured by love, and we have to try and lead in holiness.
Therefore you could say that we are called to lead also in love. There
is always something new to be learned.

St. Josemaría told us that we have to try and love other people with
their defects (J. Escrivá, *Friends of God*, Point 227). We love through
understanding, patience, service, sacrifice, avoiding negative
criticism, seeing Christ in others, through offering irritations.

Somebody in another country told me once that, "I realize that if I was
really humble, these little things wouldn\'t bother me." We can always
grow in that understanding, in that patience.

There\'s a book called *Effective Executive* by Peter Drucker, which
talks about or looks at what makes people effective in organizations. He
says the key factor that makes people effective is that they don't just
ask themselves good questions; they ask themselves the right question.

And the right question is always: \"What can I contribute?" What can I
give at this committee meeting, from this office, in this organization,
for us while in this get-together, at these mealtimes, in the center
where I live, in my professional work, in my family surroundings? What
can I contribute?

And if possible, what can I contribute that nobody else can contribute?
Because if I can contribute something that nobody else can contribute,
with my talents, with my abilities, with my acumen, with my prayer, then
that makes me effective. One thing we all have to try and learn, and
yearn for, is to be more effective.

That particular pathway to effectiveness is very relevant in our family
life, in our vocation, and every day of our lives---more effective,
through putting this love into practice in concrete ways, through
understanding, through patience, through loving others with their
defects.

One time I was having dinner with a 75-year-old French missionary priest
in the highlands of Malaysia. He had spent many years in China.

There were just the two of us. Halfway through the meal, he took out his
false teeth and put them on the table. He said, \"This chili that we eat
here in Malaysia makes my teeth a bit loose.\" It was the first time I
had dinner with a pair of false teeth looking at me across the table.

He told me that the previous week he had gone to visit a city there
where he used to work, at a place called Penang. There was a doctor
there who had invited him out to lunch. He had been very close to him
when he was a parish priest there.

He said, "I don\'t like fancy restaurants any more, but he invited me
there and I couldn\'t refuse, so I went there. I also had trouble with
my teeth, so I took them out as well, but I was a bit more discreet; I
wrapped them in the napkin. And then I was chatting away to other people
at the table and looked back, the napkin was gone.

"The waitress had taken the napkin. I had to rush to the kitchen, I
looked at the garbage can, but I got my false teeth back okay."

Sometimes the defects of other people can become very visible, and yet
this is a divine call to see Christ in others.

"May you seek Christ, may you find Christ, may you love Christ" (J.
Escrivá, *The Way*, Point 382).

Confucius has a statement whereby he says we become what we condemn.
They\'re interesting words from a non-Christian philosopher: we become
what we condemn. In other words, be careful about what you condemn, and
what you might express negative words or ideas about very vigorously.

It\'s like a call to be very positive---positive in our conversations,
positive in get-togethers, positive in our comments.

*Gaudium meum in domum meum cum fratribus meus--*My greatest joy is to
be at home with my brothers. Our greatest joy in moments has to be at
home and with our family, like any good Christian person.

I could ask Our Lord to help me to forget about all the little things
that might separate me from others.

St. Josemaría has given us that criterion to try and steal heaven for
others so that we know those words, those actions, those gestures that
only those who love know are important.

What does this person around me need at this particular moment? What can
I give? What can I contribute?

That word, that gesture. Sometimes that silence. Just being there. Often
the witness of presence itself is very powerful.

We had an excursion one time in Singapore at a deanery meeting. We went
out into the bay in a boat. Among the priests who were there was an
85-year-old Jesuit priest.

He couldn\'t move around the boat very much. He just sort of sat there.

Coming home afterward with another priest, I happened to mention how
nice it was that that 85-year-old priest made the effort to come---just
to be there, even if he couldn\'t move around the boat very much.

This other priest said, \"Yes, it shows you," he said, "the witness of
presence." I was rather struck by that phrase. I hadn\'t heard it
before.

In our lives, the witness of presence can be very important---just to be
there at that meal, in that get-together with that person, with that
sick person.

Often it\'s not what we say or what we do. It\'s just that presence that
expresses love.

A mother in Ganda a couple of years ago told me how she had a
miscarriage; she was the mother of a Standard 4 girl. She said all the
other mothers were very helpful, very supportive, and very kind. But
there was one mother, she said, who had lost a seven-year-old child a
few years previously. She said, "She used to come and sit with me."

She said while with all the other mothers, their presence and their help
meant an awful lot, just that presence of that lady meant more than all
the others.

She\'d been through something similar. She used to just sit there
silently. She knew what to say, and what not to say. The witness of
presence. That presence can be so powerful with the people that we love.

Everyone needs that affection because everybody has a human heart.

The Holy Spirit has come to "enkindle in our hearts the fire of His
love"---that divine love that hopefully we can spread to so many other
people, to a world that is so much in need of love.

Human love is a reflection of divine love. The devil is so aware of it.
It\'s so powerful and so important that he messes it up for all young
people. But we have the answers.

Charity has no prejudices. It reaches out to everybody. We try and be
available to everybody in all sorts of situations.

We go out of our way to take care of the sick---not just visiting them
or smiling, but just being there. The consolation of company; thinking:
what do they need, what do they like?

Also, we show our love by taking care of the norms of rest so that we
can be in better shape to contribute positively to the family
atmosphere.

A Christian loves with a charity that comes from God. It\'s a
supernatural charity.

We see the blood of Christ flowing in the veins of others. That leads us
to constantly get out of our own shoes, and try to see everything as
other people see them.

If we just abandon ourselves to the dynamism of getting things done, we
can easily lose our supernatural outlook.

We can be very active---busy, busy, busy doing things, and maybe, doing
very important things---but possibly neglecting that which is the most
important: our heart in our home, our heart in our family, our heart in
the tabernacle, our heart in our vocation.

If ever there is a storm growing in our hearts, we can say: "Jesus, give
me peace." We know that He will stand up in the boat and speak to the
elements: "Peace, be still" (Mark 4:39).

He can calm our imagination, He can calm our sentiments.

Only with peace and supernatural vision can we listen to what other
people are saying to us; listening also to the things that are said to
us in the means of formation, so that we get the message. It's very
important to listen.

Some people can\'t explain things very clearly, but other people can\'t
understand things clearly. We have to try and detect and see what it is
that this person is trying to say to me.

We try to enjoy the company of all. To try and avoid anybody\'s company
is wrong.

Friends are the family we choose for life. We listen to all happily. We
listen not just to their words, but also to their feelings.

We can train ourselves to hear what other people are trying to say to
us.

Sometimes the body language can be expressive. Sometimes their silences
can be very expressive. A person who doesn\'t understand a person\'s
silences will not understand their words either.

This love of God that we have in our hearts leads us to be sensitive to
the needs of all because we never know how heavy a burden another person
may be carrying. We don\'t know what they just heard, what they went
through today at the office, or some other thing that happened to them
in their life.

There was a lady professor who was on the subway in New York on a Sunday
morning reading her newspaper, commenting to herself how pleasant it was
to be on the subway on a Sunday morning. No rush hour traffic, and it's
very peaceful.

At the next station, a lady got on the train with five children, sat in
front of her, closed her eyes, [and]{.underline} the five children began
to run around the carriage. They were shouting and screaming and
roaring.

This lady professor got very irate. They bumped into her knee. They
banged against her newspaper.

She kept quiet for as long as she could, but then she decided she
couldn\'t take it anymore.

She put down her newspaper, tapped the woman on the knee, who opened her
eyes, and said to her in a rather belligerent tone, \"Don\'t you think
you should do something about your children?"

The lady opened her eyes and said, \"Perhaps I should, but I\'ve just
come from the hospital where their father died and I\'m a bit
confused.\"

The lady professor was thrown back on her heels. She had no idea where
this woman was coming from; what had just happened in her life; how the
life of her children had just changed irrevocably.

We can be crucifying other people with our pride and yet not know what
they may be going through.

St. Josemaría had a horror that anyone in Opus Dei might feel alone. You
have to be sensitive to that.

One time I was in charge of the door in Villa Tevere. Don Álvaro was
going out one day and normally they would come down and then get into
the car straight away. When they got into the car, that was the signal
to open the garage door.

This time, I was standing at the door waiting for them to get into the
car, but they didn\'t get into the car. Don Álvaro, Don Javier, and Don
Joaquin were obviously waiting for somebody. Eventually, somebody came,
who was Don Julián, and then they got into the car.

But in those few minutes, they were chit-chatting.

Don Álvaro noticed that I was standing there beside the garage door, so
he came over to chat with me. It was just a very few simple moments.
"How are you? Any news from where you come from?\" A little chit-chat,
but it was very eloquent.

He spotted somebody who might be a little bit alone, or who might be
feeling alone in just that couple of seconds, and immediately dropped
what he was talking about.

I presume they weren\'t talking about Manchester United, and he came to
chat with me.

That\'s the sort of sensitivity we have to try and have. The fruit of
that charity is unity. *Cor unum et anima una* (Acts 4:32).

When the Nuncio came to Strathmore House for dinner a year or two ago,
he saw above the altar, during the visit, the phrase *Consummati in
unum.*

On the way out he asked me, Why *Consummati in unum.* When I explained
he said, \"Oh, of course."

The messages we get are written in big letters sometimes, but it takes a
while for us to grasp their full meaning.

We\'re called to enjoy family life and to see that our affection has to
be manifested often in little sacrifices. We can easily live in our own
little world: my jobs, my ideas, my little world of which I am
lord---whereas we are called to share everything.

The different inequalities among men are all part of the divine plan.
Some are hardworking, some are intelligent, some are practical, some are
responsible.

If we have more, we have to try and give more. Our Lord has called us to
give and to give generously, to see concrete ways.

There is a Jewish writer who says, "The opposite of love is not hatred,
it\'s indifference" (Elie Wiesel, *Interview*, Oct. 27, 1986)---not
caring, seeing something that we could do and not doing or not
bothering, or walking by something that needs attention.

Charity means doing things. "Well done is better than well said"
(Benjamin Franklin).

Charity has to be demonstrative. We say, \"Yes, I love everybody, but I
just don\'t show it very much. I\'m not that type of person. It\'s not
manifested externally." Well then, that\'s not charity. It has to be
shown in concrete ways.

That means sometimes too, we have to grow in the virtue of
communication.

The 21st century is the century of communication---learning how to
communicate well with our words, with our tone, with our accents, with
different things, with our gestures. Body language can be important.

We have to grow in our understanding: an understanding that other people
have limitations. We have to put ourselves in their shoes.

All this is part of being the good shepherd.

God has captured me with His love, and He wants me to spread that love
in all sorts of ways, and to realize the power of words. Words can lift
up and words can bring down.

There was a king who gave a banquet once. He told a cook in charge of
the catering that these were the not-so-important people in his kingdom,
so just prepare something fairly normal.

When the moment came to serve the meal, it turned out that the meal was
tongue. Okay, no problem, cooked tongue, or boiled tongue, or whatever
it was.

Then a few weeks later, he had another banquet. This was for the very
important people in his kingdom. He told the cook to prepare something
very important.

When the moment came to serve the meal, the cook also served tongue.

When everybody had gone home, the king went to the cook and said: "I
told you to prepare something not so important and you prepared tongue.
And then I tell you to prepare something very important and you prepare
tongue also. What\'s the meaning of this?"

He said, "You see, the tongue can be used in various ways. You can use
it to bring people up or you can use it to bring people down.\"

We have to be careful with our words.

Words can be like arrows that can be directed to human hearts. Words can
crucify. They can hurt. They can cause pain and the pain can last. That
pain may not stop when our words stop.

Choosing the right words. Being very affirmative. St. Paul says to "keep
encouraging one another" (Heb. 3:13)---a very powerful phrase. Everybody
needs encouragement.

It's a beautiful thing if everybody we come in contact with always goes
away very affirmed and encouraged, because this world can bring them
down.

The chapter on pessimism is the chapter in our Father's work in *The
Forge* that I\'ve recommended more to people in the last forty years
than any other chapter.

Christian life can be a bit discouraging sometimes. Everybody needs
encouragement.

That love can be shown in the charity to correct, which at times may be
difficult, may demand a lot of fortitude. We might have to go out of
ourselves completely, but yet it\'s a great act of divine love.

Charity is shown in detail. Love is in the details, the small things. "A
little act done for love is worth so much." A little word done for love
is worth so much. A little communication.

It might be somebody of the Work, might be somebody very far away from
the Work, possibly somebody who never hears words of encouragement.

'Good luck with an exam.' 'I\'m with you.' 'I\'m taking care of you.'
'Good luck in that match that you\'re playing that is important.'

The person knows that this person has my back. They\'re thinking of me.
So supportive.

Compliments draw people out. Everybody needs compliments.

Sometimes we may have to offer up the moods that we may be going
through, our feelings. We have to try and help others to improve.

We have to try and watch personal grudges, especially in the face of
events and situations that may make us a bit critical or frustrated or
disappointed. These are divine calls to pray a little more, to smile, to
learn the value of silence.

That new book from Cardinal Sarah is very powerful: *The Power of
Silence*.

There was a journalist in Singapore once who retired and then told me he
gave seminars to civil servants on communication because many people did
not have great English. They had a Chinese background. Also, they could
get a bit emotional in their emails, and so there were emails flying
around the civil service that were a bit electric.

His job was to sort of calm people down a little bit. He would get small
little groups to give this seminar on communication.

At the end of the financial year, the numbers would increase because
different heads of departments wanted to exhaust their budget. They
would send along more people just perhaps who didn\'t want to be at
these seminars. They were just there because the boss told them to go.
Sometimes this was a bit of a problem.

On one occasion, there was a lady who obviously had been sent by her
boss. She didn\'t want to be there, and she became a major social
problem. She was saying things to people, making comments, very
negative, very critical, and was destroying the whole seminar.

He said, "I invoked the Holy Spirit. I asked the Holy Spirit: 'Help me.
When the moment comes to tell this lady to go back to her office, help
me to do it right, because after all, this is a seminar on
communication. Help me to put it well, to choose the right words and
help me to last as long as I can.'

"Help me to say it right, to say to this lady: 'Madam, why don\'t you go
back to your office and we create a win-win situation. You let me do my
job and I let you do your job. We live in peace forever and live happily
ever after.'"

A few minutes later while he was making this sort of prayer while giving
a seminar, he happened to mention the head of some department in the
civil service in very favorable terms: he\'s an excellent civil servant,
he\'s a very good professional, he\'s a model of what all civil servants
should be---without mentioning the name.

Then this lady popped up with a name, a Chinese name: Goh Chok Tong. He
said, \"Yes, Mr. Goh Chok Tong, he\'s an excellent civil servant.\"
He\'s this, he\'s that and the other thing.

This lady said, \"My husband."

He said, \"Oh my goodness, this terrible woman is the wife of that good
friend of mine. Thank you, Holy Spirit. Thank you, Holy Spirit."

He said we never realize the great good that can come from just keeping
our big mouth shut.

And he said, "That was coming up to Christmas and Chinese New Year, when
I get paid by the number of people that come to my seminars. The extra
number of people coming is an extra bit of cash in my pocket."

\"That friend of mine," he said a few days later, "sent many more people
than he would normally send." Obviously his wife had gone back and
complimented the speaker of the seminar.

He said, "I could have lost a friend forever, but it turned out to be
very lucrative." He said, also we don\'t realize the lucrative value
sometimes of keeping our big mouths shut.

The Christmas greeting of the angels, "Peace on earth," is very
important for us. We come to bring peace to all situations: peace
through sacrifice and self renunciation; peace not just through our
human effort alone, but through the intercession of God, so that the
love of Christ can spread to all people.

Every person is valuable. You have something positive to say. And
sometimes charity, as mentioned, is manifested in good manners: please
and thank you.

Good table manners, good telephone manners, and nowadays good manners on
social media, saying thank you and please or spelling things right---all
these small things.

James Stenson says that good manners is the basis of professional life.
Another strong statement. Good manners is the basis of professional
life.

Dealing with other people professionally. They like to be spoken to
well, or handled well, talked to well. There's a lot to be learned from
that.

In our family, Aunt Carmen and the grandmother have given us very high
standards.

It\'s a common need of all humanity---charity manifested through good
manners: please and thank you to everybody. It\'s a consequence of
formation, of education.

Little by little we can grow in all these things. There are civilized
ways of acting and reacting. These are ways of behaving and acting and
reacting that express respect for others.

"Our thoughts become our words, our words become our actions, our
actions become our habits, our habits become our character, and our
character becomes our destiny" (attributed to Lao Tzu).

Charity---love---in our thoughts. Sometimes the strongest things in the
world can seem the weakest. Gentleness is stronger than cruelty.
Patience is stronger than impatience. Mercy is stronger than revenge.
Love is stronger than hate.

It is the great corporate message that the whole Church tries to give
the world.

In Singapore, there was an elders' group in one parish who took it upon
themselves to send a birthday card to all the priests of the diocese
every year. In the Catholic directory, all the birthdays of the priests
were there. They would make a homemade birthday card and send it to you.
Every year you\'d get this birthday card.

One year I opened this birthday card and the dedication inside said: "On
this day when you remember all the blessings with which God has blessed
you in your life, never forget how much you have made other people
suffer."

Rather interesting dedication to get on your birthday. Of course, very
interesting, and I cut it out. Every time I give a talk on charity, I
come across it. It\'s good to remember how much we\'ve made other people
suffer.

Sometimes in school I tell the little kids, \"Go home and ask your Mom,
was I ever unlovable?" She\'ll say, \"Sit down for an hour, I\'ll tell
you about it.\"

Or what was my pregnancy like when you carried me for nine months? Or
what was my labor like? How did you feel, contraction by contraction?
It\'s a good thing to think about sometimes.

God may use other people as instruments in our lives like gloves:
sometimes as instruments of inspiration, but sometimes as instruments of
purification. Sometimes he uses us as instruments of purification of
others.

If God causes us sometimes to suffer, sometimes He wants us to suffer in
silence. *Jesus autem tacebat* (Matt. 26:63)*---*very powerful words in
the story of the Passion.

Euripides says: "In silence wisdom is born."

Our interior or exterior silence can be an index of how perfect is our
holocaust.

In Joseph of Nazareth, we see silence. Silence of the Holy Family on
their journey to Bethlehem. "Abused and ill-treated, he opened not his
mouth\...dumb as a lamb before his shearers" (Josemaría Escrivá, *The
Way of the Cross*, Ninth Station, quoting Isa. 53:7).

That divine love expressed in our life is always a unifying reality---a
creating unity.

From reading these beautiful words of St. John, "God is love" (1 John
4:8), we could ask Our Lady, that we might come back to those words
again and again. St. John must have meditated on that example of Our
Lady and also on her words, so that later on he could express them so
eloquently in his writings.

Mary, you may help us to be captured each day by the love of God that
has poured into our hearts.

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, Saint
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*JM*
