---
layout: homily
title: "Correspondence to Grace"
---

By Fr. Conor Donnelly

(*Proofread*)

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see
me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your
pardon for my sins and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My
Immaculate Mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel,
intercede for me.*

"For it is like a man going abroad, who called his servants and handed
over his goods to them. And to one he gave five talents, to another two,
and to another one, to each according to his particular ability. Then he
went on his journey.

"He who had received the five talents went and traded with them and
gained five more. In like manner he who had received two gained two
more. But he who had received the one went away and dug in the earth and
hid his master\'s money" (Matt. 25:14-18).

Our Lord gives us very graphic examples in the Gospel. One lesson that
could be taken from this particular story is how those to whom five
talents were given, and two talents were given, corresponded to the
graces God gave them.

This meditation is about corresponding to grace and generosity in that
correspondence.

When Our Lord handed over is goods to them, He made an act of trust and
confidence in them. They were His goods and He was entrusting them to
their care.

This is a bit like the talents and the abilities that God gives us. Some
of our talents are very obvious, things we're aware that we can do, our
physical capabilities, and also, the other capabilities. But very often
there are many hidden talents.

Hidden talents that possibly will make themselves known in the course of
time, but also hidden in the fact that we don\'t know that we have them.
We don\'t realize that these things are talents: our sight, our hearing,
our forelimbs, things we take for granted every day.

And also, all the hidden graces that God gives us every day of our
life---to be able to do this, to be able to do that---graces from every
Communion, every sacrament of Confession, graces from our spiritual
reading, from our chat, from our Circle, from our retreat, fraternal
correction, from all the means of formation; graces that we get from the
example we see in the people we live with, the acts of virtue Our Lord
lets us see.

There may be many other acts of virtue that we see, but it doesn\'t
register. So, all the time, Our Lord has given us five talents. If we
didn\'t have five talents we wouldn\'t be here.

Our Lord has given us an awful lot. "Those to whom much has been given,
much will be demanded" (Luke 12:48). Much will be expected.

For everything that God has given to us, He expects a certain return.

We often hear a lot about God\'s mercy, which is very true and relevant,
but we don\'t hear much about God\'s justice. In justice, God will
demand a return from all the things He\'s given to us.

Therefore, every day of our life we need to have a certain concern about
our correspondence. Lord, give me the grace to be generous in my
correspondence.

St. Paul says, "What have you that you have not received?" (1 Cor 4:7).
Everything is a gift.

"And to one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one."
Not everybody got the same talents, but everybody got talents.

We\'re not told that there was somebody there who got no talents. So,
none of us can say or try and have the excuse that 'I wasn\'t there when
they were giving out the talents.'

We all have certain abilities, graces, gifts. We have to try and
discover those with the humility to see what we\'re good at. All of us
are good at certain things and all are not so good at others.

Socrates says, "Know thyself." Often we might think we\'re good at
something, but that might not be the reality.

I brought a group of students not so long ago to sing, from a certain
school, to sing for some elderly nuns, because they all told me they
were very good singers.

The reality was that some of them were very good at playing the piano
and very good at playing the violin. But unfortunately, they were not
the wonderful singers they thought they were.

I asked the nuns, about this time last year, if they would like another
concert sometime. And the answer I got from these 90-year-olds was next
time.

So, they appreciated the music very much, but I\'m afraid the voices
left a little bit to be desired.

Some people may think they have a great voice, but they might not have a
great voice. That\'s why often we need objective advice.

If you\'ve seen the TV series Britain\'s Got Talent or American Idol, or
these things where people audition to see if they can get on the show
and some of them are told very bluntly that 'you have the worst voice
I\'ve ever heard in my whole life.'

Then they\'re also filmed as they leave the theatre, and some of them
are muttering under their breath saying, 'That judge doesn\'t recognize
talent when he sees it.'

All sorts of other very amusing statements are very revealing and can
some kind show how people can sometimes have a very different opinion of
their talents than maybe, the objective reality.

So, it's a very good thing to have somebody tell us we have a certain
talent. And if we have a certain talent, to demand from us.

You see all the great Kenyan athletes who win the Boston Marathon and
the London Marathon---they all have coaches. The coaches are there
demanding more from their charges because they know this person can do
better.

They\'re there with a stopwatch. It\'s possible. Many world records have
been broken because the coaches have been demanding. We all need
somebody who\'s a bit demanding of us.

We need to be stretched to reach our full potential and discover what
that full potential is.

So, if a lot is demanded of us, that\'s a very good sign. That\'s a sign
of confidence, a sign of ability, a sign that objectively somebody sees
that I can hack it and manage more.

Very often that person is God, demanding more from us.

Sometimes people might demand more from us when we don\'t feel like
giving. We might say, 'Oh, I\'m tired. Oh, I don\'t need to go at full
stretch all the time.'

Many of these athletes are running up a hill in Eldoret at 5:00 in the
morning when it\'s raining, and they haven't slept well last
night---probably they all feel like that.

But they all end up breaking world records, winning the marathon. We
only see them when they\'re breaking the tape at the final finish. We
don\'t see them in those other moments when they\'re having a rough
time.

Our Lord asks us to be generous in our correspondence to grace. If more
is asked of us, usually it\'s because we can give more.

St. Josemaría used to have an aspiration he used to say: *Siempre más*,
"always more" (Josemaría Escrivá, *Friends of God*, Point 72; *The
Forge*, Point 545).

We can always do more; we can always give more. We can always demand
more from ourselves.

Throughout the course of our life, it\'s a very healthy thing to
maintain that spirit of self-demand; not letting ourselves get off easy.
St. Josemaría used to say, "Sometimes Josemaría is not happy with
Josemaría."

We see other moments when he talks about how he fools himself. 'This
morning I felt tired, I didn\'t feel like doing something, I didn\'t
sleep well last night, but I told myself I\'ll rest this afternoon.'

He pushes himself in the morning to do more. Then the afternoon comes
and he manages to fool himself into not taking a rest.

He says, 'I won again. I defeated my laziness, my selfishness, and all
those base tendencies that are there inside me. I conquered myself.'

It\'s a very good spirit of fight to have, to fight against that old
person that\'s there within us, that doesn\'t want to be demanded from,
that wants an easy, comfortable life.

He used to say that living for Jesus Christ means "to complicate our
life." Complicate our life for Jesus Christ (J. Escrivá, *Friends of
God*, Point 21; *Christ Is Passing By*, Point 19).

Lord, help me to learn how to be more generous.

Cardinal Sin, in Manila one time, was talking to priests. He said he was
arriving from Rome one time, and he was coming in from the airport, and
he saw a big billboard advertising animal feed. There was a hen and
there was a pig. The two animals were discussing this new animal feed.

Mr. Pig was saying to Mrs. Hen, 'You know, Mrs. Hen, you and I, we make
a great contribution to society because, between your eggs and my bacon,
we get the whole world going every morning. Where would the world be
without us?'

Mr. Pig said to Mr. Hen, 'But you know, it\'s a very interesting
phenomenon. In your case, it\'s a contribution; in my case, it\'s a
total commitment. The hen gives her egg but literally, the pig gives his
bacon.'

In this, Cardinal Sin was getting the whole message for his homily to
all his priests. You\'ve come to make a total commitment, a total
commitment to Christ. Give our bacon, spend ourselves, to hold nothing
back.

When Our Lord gave the five talents, and the two talents, and the one,
He was giving, we're told, "to each according to his particular
ability."

Not everything is demanded from everybody. Not everything is expected
from everybody. There are certain things we can manage and there are
certain things we can\'t manage. But we\'re not the best judge of that.

God has given us each a role to play.

We can\'t all break the marathon record for two hours. That\'s just
specific people. Elliot Kipchoge, and maybe somebody else will come
along and make a new record.

That\'s not the pathway for all of us, thank God. But we are called
along our pathway.

Each according to his specific abilities. God leads us along that
pathway.

He gives us the gifts and the graces for the mission that He\'s given to
us. That mission always entails holiness and apostolate.

To be holy with a canonizable holiness where God has placed me, and to
do as much apostolate of friendship and confidence with as many people
as I can in the environment and in the world where God has placed me.

It\'s part of our talents, and then we channel all of our talents in
that direction. Our ability to use time well. Our ability to keep up
with people, to keep the contact warm.

I was talking to somebody a couple of years ago who was involved in a
residence in Europe.

Many of those who passed through that residence went off to very
far-away places. Now, thirty years later, some of them are quite wealthy
or well-to-do.

This person has kept up with them for over thirty years and is now
getting a lot of donations for that particular residence---doing a lot
of things with those material means.

There was a big gap between the time that they were in the residence and
the time that they developed themselves professionally and were able to
contribute a lot.

This person was asked, 'What is the secret of your success?'

He said, 'Keep the contact warm.' These are very interesting words. Keep
the contact warm.

One of the talents and abilities that God has given to all of us is the
ability to keep the contact warm. Keep in contact with people. Remember
their birthdays.

We have great instruments now which didn\'t exist thirty years ago,
e-mail and WhatsApp and all these different things. These can be
apostolic instruments.

Keep in touch with classmates. Get back in touch with primary school
contacts or secondary school contacts. There\'s a whole world there.

Generous in our correspondence to the graces that God gives us to
practice the apostolate of friendship and confidence, because we have a
great message to give to people. Something very special. It\'s talent.

"He handed over his goods to them." Spiritual goods and material goods.
They were goods. They were treasures.

He believed in the specific ability of each one of these three servants
to be able to handle those goods, to take care of them, to realize the
treasures that they were, to see their value.

Lord, help me to know the value of things. The value of time. The value
of opportunity. The value of formation. The value of the graces that God
gives us.

Wonderful spiritual treasures. I may have mentioned before that on
Saitoti Road there, there\'s a clock, and under the clock, there\'s a
phrase that says, 'Time is free, but it\'s priceless."

It\'s not often along the road you pick up a phrase like that. 'Time is
free, but it\'s priceless.'

Some of our talents are given to us for free, but they\'re priceless.
Hidden treasures that are worth so much.

Thank you, Lord, for the treasures you\'ve placed in my soul, in my
heart, with my Christian vocation, with all the other gems of formation
that you give me, and all the opportunities.

Help me have this attitude of desire to use them very well; not to waste
any of the opportunities and the talents that you\'ve given to me, to
take very good care of them.

We\'ve heard the story of the farmer who used to grow very good maize.

Every year, he would win the local competition for the best maize in the
whole area. Every year when he won the competition, he would give some
of the seeds of his best maize to all of his neighbors.

Somebody asked him, "Why do you give all these best seeds of your best
maize to your neighbors? Is that not diminishing your possibilities of
having the best maize?"

He said, "No, I try to help my neighbors grow good maize because when
the wind blows, the wind will blow some of those seeds onto my land. And
because those seeds are the best seeds, that maintains the standard of
my maize.

"If I was to let all my neighbors sow an inferior quality maize and
their seeds got blown onto my land, that would diminish the quality of
my maize." So, this is one of the secrets of growing good corn.

We grow in our holiness and virtue by helping everybody around us grow
in virtue: fraternal correction, example, prayer, apostolate.

"Then he went away on his journey." This was real trust and confidence
that he placed in his charges that he had.

He went far away. We\'re not told that he was close by and was checking
every day on how they were doing and making sure that nothing got
wasted. No, he went far away on his journey. There\'s trust, there\'s
confidence.

An awful lot is left to us, to our personal correspondence, to how we
approach the game, how we approach the race. We\'re left to our
abilities.

There\'s an invitation to responsibility there.

I have to learn how to function, how to think, how to dream, how to work
with the mentality of a manager, with the mentality of somebody in
charge.

It\'s my responsibility because someday I\'m going to have to give an
account of what I\'m asked to do. Somebody\'s going to check on my work
or see if this thing has been done okay.

They\'re going to look at the results; they\'re not going to look at me
every minute and see how I\'m doing this and how I\'m doing that. A lot
is left up to my own personal initiative.

Those are two very beautiful words in the vocabulary of a member of Opus
Dei or any member of the Church: initiative and responsibility.

To think with the mentality of the person in charge, which ultimately is
to think with the mind or the mentality of God. What does God want from
me?

Help me to put my whole heart and mind into this job. Sometimes you can
come across people who do a slip-shod job.

They sort of don\'t care. You go into a shop, and you can see that they
have a sort of 'I only work here' type of attitude and they really
don\'t care about the customer.

But it\'s also very noticeable when you go into a shop and somebody has
a service mentality or a service orientation.

How can I help you? What can I do for you? How can I get this particular
thing that you\'re looking for?

You see it immediately. This person is interested in their job. They\'re
trying to be good at what they\'re trying to do.

Our formation has to lead us to want to be good at what we\'re doing,
which means we\'re open to learn. We\'re open to being corrected. We\'re
open to being taught.

Because we\'re not born knowing these things, we can learn better ways
of doing things, better ways of saying things, more efficient ways of
fulfilling the tasks we have in hand.

And that means we have to be open to change, open to learn, and very
grateful to people who teach us new things, because all the time we\'re
developing ourselves. It\'s a lovely word, "development."

The Catholic Church in her documents talks a lot about *authentic
development*. We\'re interested in the authentic development of society
itself.

Other organizations talk about development, but they can use all sorts
of means that are immoral or unjust and don\'t lead to true development.
They lead to a pseudo-development.

We\'re interested in our development of our personality, of our
abilities, in all possible means, because God is looking for the return
of those five talents. Someday He wants to be able to say, "Well done,
good and faithful servant! Because you\'ve been faithful in little
things, I have greater things to commit to your charge" (Matt. 15:21).

"And he who received the five talents went and traded with them" (Matt.
15:20).

This person was aware that he had five talents. He wasn\'t aware that he
had three and a half. He didn\'t just trade with two of them.

He didn\'t just say, 'It\'s easy for me to do something with these
three, but I\'m not too sure about the other two.'

Or, 'I\'m not happy about the other two. I\'ll just bury the other two.
I won\'t put too much effort there.' Some of the talents required much
effort, and some were very easy, and he chose the easy way.

But Our Lord says, "Enter by the narrow gate" (Matt. 7:13). Choose the
difficult pathway. Some of those talents might be a bit more challenging
to develop.

But Our Lord wants us to develop the five talents, not two and a half,
or three, or what\'s comfortable, or what\'s easy, or what doesn\'t cost
an effort. We have to work on those five talents.

I was sent a WhatsApp this morning, from a sister of mine advertising a
new type of coffee made somewhere in the world. It\'s called the Heroic
Minute Blend.

It's somehow linked up with the St. Josemaría Institute. What an
interesting title for a coffee: the Heroic Minute Blend.

Some of our talents are tied up with that heroic minute, and possibly we
don\'t have a Heroic Minute Blend to help us on our way. But at the same
time, we have a talent to be able to develop that.

The person who developed that blend and put that name on it was
developing their talent for marketing things. Possibly 92,000 people all
over the world have an interest in knowing about the Heroic Minute
Blend, and possibly buying the Heroic Minute Blend.

This is an initiative to make money out of all sorts of ways that we can
make money. That\'s also a talent we\'ve received to help the corporate
apostolic works, to think out of the box, to have initiative, to have an
entrepreneurial spirit. All sorts of things.

Lord, give me ideas. Help me to think.

As you know, there is a soft drink in this country, a soda called
Alvaro. That came out, I think, just before the canonization of St.
Josemaría.

Somebody had the bright idea of bringing a number of bottles of Alvaro
to the ceremony of the canonization of St. Josemaría. It was an instant
success.

They sold quite a number of bottles immediately to people from all over
the world and brought us a memento of the canonization: this bottle of
Alvaro.

Well, that was initiative. Thinking out of the box, making money in all
sorts of ways.

"The one who received the five talents went and traded with them"---used
his ingenuity.

What can I do? What can I contribute? How can I make each one of these
talents yield an abundant harvest?

He was thinking out of the box. He was using all that time to think in
different ways, making hay while the sun shined; helping each one of
those talents also to yield not just some sort of return, but to yield
the best return.

Our Father wants each one of us to be a good businessperson.

Once, our Father said, "Some of my regional vicar's sons are very good
businessmen." Interesting comment. They know how to get the best value
out of the things they have; how to work with what they have: conference
centers, Centers here, Centers there, schools, universities.

How to get a great yield, maybe in difficult circumstances or
environments. Our Father wants us to have that mentality of a good
businessperson---how to get the best yield from what we have, how to see
new business possibilities for the enterprise we are involved in, of
holiness and the apostolate. We are spreading good things around the
world.

I was listening last night to a bioethics seminar organized by
Strathmore University and Fanusi Study Centre. It\'s very much directed
internationally, all over the world. Spread good ideas.

About a hundred people attended. You see, in the midst of a pandemic, we
discovered a way of communicating through Zoom sessions. We see that we
can link up with people in all countries, maybe students in all sorts of
places.

So, we have an opportunity to spread good ideas. I have a personal dream
that Nairobi will become a hub for good ideas---spread things all over
the world---because there are many places in the world where young
people are not hearing good ideas.

We have a great setup here. And with Zoom, we can spread those things in
so many places.

Our Father said one of our "dominant passions" has to be to spread
doctrine (Javier Echevarría, *Letter from the Prelate*, June 3, 2016).
So, we think out of the box of new ways to spread doctrine.

Spread ideas. Whether it\'s with a new blend of coffee or whether it\'s
a Zoom seminar or webinar or all sorts of other things. That\'s up to
us.

But maybe someday in the course of our life, God will give us an idea.

Somebody said that one of the strongest things in the world is "an idea
whose time has come" (Victor Hugo, *The Future of Man*). The Heroic
Minute Blend comes from an idea, and here we are talking about a new
idea.

We don\'t know where that idea came from, but it came from somewhere.
Somebody was thinking, somebody who had an idea. Going to go around the
world as people wake up this morning to this new idea.

So, we trade it with them. Lord, teach me to trade.

Trade, to look at each of the talents you\'ve given to me. See how I can
use this, how I can use that, how I can absorb our spirit and help it
yield a rich harvest through my correspondence.

Because we don\'t know also the fruits that God is expecting from our
correspondence, the souls He\'s going to bring us in contact
with---maybe a soul that\'s going to change the world or going to
produce a new idea or a new blend of coffee.

That will make an awful lot of money to support corporate apostolic
work. Or some other little thing. It can have a big impact. Lord, God
gives us those ideas. Help us to think.

Or, from the way that we use a certain machine, we\'ll get an idea of
how this machine could be improved or could be better. We\'ll patent
that idea and do an awful lot of good with it around the world. We never
know.

"In like manner, he who would receive two, gained two more" (cf. Matt.
25:22).

The person with two didn\'t say, 'Oh, I only have two. I didn\'t get
five. It\'s not fair.'

No, they were focused on yielding the fruit of those two. They weren\'t
bothered about comparisons.

I don\'t have a wonderful voice. Or, I can\'t sing like Julie Andrews or
Pavarotti or somebody. And then go off to a corner and cry.

The one who would receive two took the baton and ran with it. I have
these two talents. This is a treasure.

Optimism, enthusiasm, dynamism. Go, do things, get involved. Make an
impact, have an influence, have a splash.

God has given me these abilities. This is the race He wants me to run
in. I\'ve got to run and break the record, and win in the best way that
I can, with a great joy and happiness in working on these talents.

This is what my life is all about. Life is wonderful. Every get-together
is wonderful. Every day is an opportunity. Every hour is time.

I have this time, this opportunity. It\'s not going to come again. And
this Master has had an enormous trust in me.

God has placed great trust in each one of us. He could have trusted
others. He could have chosen others.

But He chose and trusted each of us. It\'s a great privilege --- a great
privilege to be chosen.

Therefore, that has to evoke a great spirit of gratitude, and we show
our gratitude with deeds.

As always, Our Lady is a model for us in her generosity and
correspondence to grace.

She "went with haste into the hill country" (Luke 1:39). She didn\'t
dilly-dally.

She didn\'t say, 'I'll think about it. Maybe I\'ll go, maybe I won\'t.
Maybe I\'ll go in six months. Or maybe I\'ll ask everybody\'s opinion.'

"In those days." Very quickly, she saw the will of God and she put her
whole heart and soul into fulfilling that will of God. "She went with
haste into the hill country."

Our Lady communicates great sense of urgency to everything we must do
---generosity and correspondence to grace, because God has given me five
talents.

Mary, may you help me respond to grace in the same way you did.

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and
inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I
ask your help to put them into practice. My Immaculate Mother, Saint
Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.*

*RK*
