---
layout: homily
title: "Corpus Christi (2026)"
---


By Fr. Conor Donnelly

*(Proofread)*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen. My Lord and my God, I firmly believe that you are here, that you see me, that you hear me. I adore you with profound reverence. I ask your pardon for my sins, and grace to make this time of prayer fruitful. My immaculate mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

Today's solemnity goes back to the 13th century. It was first established in the Diocese of Liège in Belgium by Pope Urban IV. He had been the bishop of that diocese, and a nun had received some communication from God that there should be a feast dedicated to the Blessed Sacrament. She talked to the local bishop about it, it happened there, and then that bishop was elected Pope, and he instituted it in 1264 for the whole church. The meaning of this feast is the consideration of and devotion to the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist.

The center of the feast was to be a solemn procession with the Blessed Sacrament, and popular devotion reflected in hymns and in joy. That same year, at the Pope's request, St. Thomas Aquinas composed two offices for the day which have nourished the piety of many Christians throughout the centuries. In many different places, the procession with the monstrance through especially bedecked streets gives testimony of the Christian people's faith and love for Christ who once passed through our cities and towns. The procession began in the same way as the feast itself. In places where the solemnity of the Most Holy Body and Blood is not observed as a holiday of obligation, it is kept on the Sunday after the Trinity Sunday as its proper day.

There is a sequence of this mass that say the praises of your Shepherd King in hymns and canticles divine. Sing forth, O Zion, sweetly sing. Today we celebrate this great solemnity in honor of the mystery of the Holy Eucharist. On this day the liturgy itself and popular piety, which have spared no efforts in their search for inventiveness and beauty, come together to sing to the love of loves. For this day, St. Thomas Aquinas composed those very beautiful texts of the mass and for the breviary. Today we must give thanks to God for having remained among us. We have to make atonement to him, and express to him our joy at having him so close to us.

The hymn which St. Thomas Aquinas composed can be a good prayer to pray today, *Adoro te devote, latens Deitas*. O Godhead hid, devoutly I adore you. We could repeat that phrase many times from the depths of our heart. When we visit the Blessed Sacrament, we'll be able to say slowly to Our Lord with love, *Plagas, sicut Thomas, non intueor*. I do not see your wounds as Thomas saw them, but I confess that you are my God. Make me believe you ever more and more, in thee my hope, in thee my love to store.

It was faith in the real presence of Christ in the Holy Eucharist that led to devotion to Jesus in the Blessed Sacrament outside of mass as well. In the first centuries of the church, the sacred species were reserved so that communion could be taken to the sick and to those who were in prison awaiting martyrdom because they had confessed their faith. As time went by, the faith and love of the believers caused them to make both public and private devotion to the Holy Eucharist far richer. Their faith led them to treat the body of Christ with the greatest possible reverence, and this also led to greater public devotion. We can find many testimonies in those ancient documents of the church to the veneration by the early church which later was to make way for the feast that we celebrate today.

Our Lord and our God is in the tabernacle. Christ is in the tabernacle. It's there that we must show him our adoration and our love. This veneration for Jesus in the Blessed Sacrament is expressed in many ways: Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament, processions, prayer before Jesus in the Blessed Sacrament, genuflections that are real acts of faith and of adoration. Amongst these devotions and various forms of worship, particularly worthy of mention is the solemnity of Corpus Christi as a public act by which the church seeks to pay homage to Christ present in the Eucharist.

John Paul II wrote, "The church and the world have great need of Eucharistic devotions. Jesus is waiting for us in the sacrament of love. Let us not be sparing in the time we spend going to meet him in adoration, in contemplation filled with faith, and let us be prepared to make reparation for the many grave faults and offenses committed against him in the world. May our adoration never cease."

Today especially can be filled with acts of faith and love for that real presence of Our Lord in the Blessed Sacrament. If we take part in some procession accompanying Jesus, we will be like those simple people who joyfully followed the Master during the days of his life on earth, and who with great naturalness told him of all their needs and about the sufferings they endured. As Christ is passing by, St. Josemaría says, "We too will experience the happiness and the joy of being with him. If we see him pass through our streets exposed in the monstrance, we will tell him from the depths of our hearts how much he means to us."

"Adore him reverently and devoutly. Renew in his presence the sincere offerings of your love. Don't be afraid to tell him that you love him. Thank him for giving you this daily proof of his tender mercy, and encourage yourself to go to communion in a spirit of trust. I am awed by this mystery of love. Here is the Lord seeking to use my heart as a throne, committed never to leave me provided I don't run away. Jesus is happier on this throne of my heart than in the most magnificent monstrance."

The words of the entrance antiphon remind us that "He has fed them from the finest wheat and given them their fill of honey from the rock" (Ps. 81:16). For many years, God fed manna to the people of Israel as they wandered in the wilderness. This was an image and symbol of the pilgrim church, and of each individual who journeys towards his or her definitive homeland, heaven. That food given in the desert, said John Paul II, in the desert of Sinai is a figure of the true food, the Holy Eucharist. This is the sacrament of the human pilgrimage. Precisely because of this, the annual feast of the Eucharist that the church celebrates today contains within its liturgy so many references to the pilgrimage of the people of the covenant in their wanderings through the wilderness.

Moses often reminded the Israelites of this wonderful deed that God had performed for his people. In the first reading, we're told, "Do not forget the Lord your God who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage" (Deut. 8:14). Today is a day of thanksgiving and of joy because God has wanted to remain with us in order to feed us and to strengthen us so that we may never feel alone. The Blessed Eucharist is our nourishment, the food for the long journey of our days on earth towards the goal of true life. Jesus accompanies us and strengthens us here in this world, for our life is like a shadow compared to the reality that awaits us.

Earthly food is a pale image of the food that we receive in Holy Communion. The Blessed Eucharist opens our hearts to a completely new reality. Although we celebrate this feast only once a year, the church really proclaims this most happy truth every day. Jesus gives us himself daily as our food, and he remains in our tabernacles to be for us the strength and the hope of a new life, a life without end and without limit. It is a mystery which is ever alive and ever new. Thank you, Lord, for remaining with us. What would have become of us without you? Where would we have gone to restore our strength and to ask for consolation? From the tabernacle you preside over the world, but especially over the life of men and women. From there, how easy you make the way for us.

One day as Jesus was leaving the city of Jericho to continue his journey towards Jerusalem, he passed by a blind man who was begging for alms at the side of the road. When he heard the sound of the little crowd that was following the Master, he asked what it meant. The people around him answered, "Jesus of Nazareth is passing by" (Luke 18:37). If today in the many cities and towns where this ancient custom of carrying the Blessed Sacrament in procession is still observed, someone was to ask when he hears the noise of the crowd, "What is it? What's happening?" We could answer him with the same words with which they answered Bartimaeus: "Jesus of Nazareth is passing by."

It is Christ himself who walks through our streets, receiving the homage of our faith and of our love. It is Christ himself. Like the heart of Bartimaeus, our hearts too should burst into shouts, "Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me" (Luke 18:38). Our Lord, who went about blessing and doing good as we're told in the Acts of the Apostles (cf. Acts 10:38), will have compassion on our blindness and on all the ills that sometimes lie heavy on our soul.

St. Paul VI said the church, by means of the feast we are celebrating today with an exuberance of faith and love, desires only to dispel the mysterious silence that surrounds the Eucharist and to emit a triumphant cry that bursts out through the walls of sanctuaries and overwhelms the streets of cities so as to infuse the whole human community with joy at the presence of Christ, of him who is the silent and strong companion of pilgrim man along the paths of time and over the earth. This is what fills our hearts with joy.

It's logical, particularly today, that the hymns that accompany the Blessed Sacrament should be hymns of adoration, of love, and of profound joy. One song says, "Let us sing the love of loves, let us sing to the Lord. Behold, our God is here. O come, let us adore Christ our Redeemer." *Pange lingua gloriosi.* Sing, my tongue, the Savior's glory, of his flesh the mystery sing.

One writer says the solemn procession that takes place in so many towns and cities of Christian tradition is of very ancient origin and is the expression with which Christian people give public testimony of their piety towards the Blessed Sacrament. On this day Our Lord takes possession of our streets and town squares. It is piety that leads the faithful to cover the streets with carpets of flowers and other ornaments. Magnificent monstrances have been designed for this feast. The closer their decorations are to the consecrated host, the richer and more intricate they are. Today many Christians will accompany Our Lord in procession as he comes to meet those who want to see him and to make himself available to those who are not looking for him. Once more he comes among his people.

How should we respond to this call of his? The Corpus Christi procession makes Christ present in towns and cities throughout the world, but his presence cannot be limited to only one day, like a sound you hear and then forget. It should remind us that we have to discover Our Lord in our ordinary everyday activities. Side by side with this solemn procession, there is the simple, silent procession of the ordinary life of each Christian. He is a man among men who by a great blessing has received the faith and the divine commission to act so that he renews the message of Our Lord on earth.

St. Josemaría says in *Christ is Passing By*, "Let us ask Our Lord then to make us souls devoted to the Blessed Eucharist, so that our relationship with him brings forth joy and serenity and a desire for justice. In this way, we will make it easier for others to recognize Christ. We will put Christ at the center of all human activities. And Jesus' promise will be fulfilled: 'I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all men to myself'" (John 12:32).

"I have come to bring fire to the earth, and how I wish it were blazing already. I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how I am constrained until it is accomplished" (Luke 12:49--50). There is a divine zeal in Christ for all souls. Just like any true friend, Our Lord reveals to his disciples his inmost thoughts. He tells them of his zeal for the salvation of souls. "I have come to cast fire upon the earth, and would that it were already enkindled" (Luke 12:49). Our Lord has a holy impatience to ignite and offer his holocaust to the Father on Calvary for the sake of mankind. "I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how I am constrained until it is accomplished" (Luke 12:50). There on the cross the fullness of God's love for his creatures was made manifest. "Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends" (John 15:13). We prove that we are Christ's friends if we struggle to follow him.

St. Augustine comments, "People who believe in him are enkindled. They receive the flame of charity." That's why the Holy Spirit appeared in this form at Pentecost. "There appeared to them tongues as of fire, distributed and resting on each one of them" (Acts 2:3). Set aflame by this fire, the apostles set out across the entire world to inflame others, including their enemies. What enemies? Those who had forsaken God their creator for the worship of man-made idols. The faith of such as these has been smothered to ashes. It's good for them, says St. Augustine, that they be set alight by this holy flame so that they may once again shine forth in Christ's glory.

This crucial task of setting the world on fire has been passed on to today's Christians. This fire of love and peace will strengthen and purify souls. Lord, help us to go to the university, to the factories, into public life, to our own homes. If one were to set fires at different locations throughout a city, even if they were modest fires, they would quickly consume the whole metropolis. Likewise, if in a city at certain points one were to ignite the hearts of the inhabitants with the fire that Jesus brought to the world, then the good will of those people would quickly overrun the city, lighting it up with the love of God.

The fire that Jesus has brought to the world is himself. It is the fire of love. This is the love which not only unites souls to God but unites souls to one another. In each city, these souls should emerge from families---father and mother, son and father, mother and mother-in-law. One writer says this phenomenon can take place in parish life, in organizations, in schools, in offices, anywhere. Each small flame for God necessarily enkindles other flames. Divine providence takes care to distribute these souls on fire where they can best serve the process. Through their action, many places in the world will be restored to the warmth of the love of God and renewed hope.

We can ask Our Lord today in the Blessed Sacrament that this apostolate in the middle of the world might spread like wildfire. Pius XII says each Christian who lives the faith seriously becomes a point of ignition at his or her place of work, among friends and acquaintances. But this phenomenon will occur only when we make concrete the advice of St. Paul to the Philippians: "Have this mind among yourselves, which was in Christ Jesus" (Phil. 2:5). The apostle challenges all Christians to live out in their lives, as much as possible, those sentiments which filled the divine redeemer when he offered himself up as a sacrifice. Imitate his humility, he says, and present to God Almighty all the adoration, honor, praise, and thanksgiving.

This offering is realized primarily in the Mass, the unbloody renewal of the sacrifice of the cross. The Second Vatican Council says, "For all their works, prayers, and apostolic endeavors, their ordinary marriage and family life, their daily occupations, their physical and mental relaxation, if carried out in the Spirit, and even the hardships of life if patiently borne---all these become spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. Together with the offering of the Lord's body, they are most fittingly offered in the celebration of the Mass" (*Lumen Gentium*, 34). As those everywhere who adore in holy activity, the laity consecrate the world itself to God.

Christian life ought to be an imitation of the life of Christ, a participation in his divine sonship. Through this way of life, we will learn from Jesus how to relate to other people. "When Jesus saw the multitude," we're told in St. Matthew, "he had compassion on them, for they were like sheep without a shepherd" (Matt. 9:36). Life held no meaning for them. But Jesus had compassion on these people. His love was so great that he went to the extent of giving up his life for them and us on the cross. This is the divine love which should fill our hearts. Then we too will have compassion on the people around us who perhaps have strayed from Our Lord. With the help of God's grace and our genuine friendship, hopefully we will bring these souls back to the Master.

In each Mass, a surging current of divine love is transmitted from the Son to the Father through the Holy Spirit. The follower of the Lord participates in this love, since he or she is incorporated into Christ. Friends of God, St. Josemaría says, "The Christian then extends this love to other people and to all earthly realities which are thereby sanctified and made into a fitting offering to God." "Our apostolate," he says, "should have its roots in the Mass and should from there draw its efficacy. For the Mass is nothing less than the realization of the redemption in our time by means of apostolic Christians."

Jesus came on earth to redeem everyone because he wished all men to be saved. There is not a single soul in whom Christ is not interested. Each soul has cost him the price of his blood. If we truly imitate Our Lord's example, we can never be indifferent towards any soul.

When a Christian participates in the Holy Mass, his prayers should be concerned first of all with his brothers and sisters in the faith. One writer says the Christian should feel more and more closely united to them in the bread of life and in the cup of eternal salvation. This is the time to pray for everyone, but especially for those who are most in need. We should grow in the spirit of charity and fraternity because the Eucharist makes us all one. As a consequence, we therefore treat one another as family. The Eucharist unites the children of God into one family, closely united to Christ and to one another.

We can ask Our Lady, whom John Paul II liked to call "Woman of the Eucharist," that she may help us to spread this fire of love for the Blessed Sacrament through our daily Eucharistic piety.

*I thank you, my God, for the good resolutions, affections, and inspirations that you have communicated to me during this meditation. I ask your help to put them into practice. My immaculate mother, Saint Joseph, my father and lord, my guardian angel, intercede for me.*

*In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.*

*EW*
